Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Revised: October 03, 2017
Published: October 02, 2011
Print an 8.5"x11" pdf of this poster.
Everyone reading this is a mammal
(unless you are a particularly sentient
anemone, coelacanth or axolotl), and
one of the things that pegs us as
mammals and unites us all is…well,
boobs. Yes, even the men and boys.
Boob-bearers, all of us.
Let me explain.
But it still seems to shock people to learn
that dogs, cats, rabbits, rats and a host
of other domestic species can get breast
cancer, too. Since the aim of Breast
Cancer Awareness Month is to raise
awareness, our aim here is to wave the
flag for those who can’t speak for
themselves and raise awareness of
mammary cancer in companion animals.
We also want people to know that breast
cancer and mammary gland cancer are
the same disease; it’s just called by a
different name in other species. Check
out the poster we created for use in
veterinary hospitals that we hope will
help pet owners understand that they're
the same.As a pre-amble ‒ and the way
this is going it could be a "pre-ramble" ‒
October is Breast Cancer Awareness
Month. I think people are fairly keyed in to the fact that humans can get breast cancer, or
mammary cancer, as it is called in companion animals; its gnarled and potentially deadly
hand has touched the lives of many of you, I presume. My own mother had surgery to
have a tumor removed that was, luckily, low grade.
Some numbers may help to illustrate the risks to dogs and cats. For humans, breast
cancer happens more frequently in more developed countries, and accounts for about 10
percent of all deaths in women between 20 and 59 (source: World Health Organization).
Data for dogs and cats and other domestic species are harder to come by as there is no
World Doggy Health Organization database to be accessed as easily as WHO data, but
estimates are that 1 in 4 dogs who are not spayed and experience more than one heat

8/2/25, 10:25 PM Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=5138471&ind=35&objTypeID=1007 1/3
The yellow Livestrong wristbands promote awareness of all types of cancer.
Copyright VIN 2011. Photo by Susan Grewe
cycle will develop mammary tumors. Those stakes are high enough that Vegas would
avoid this bet like the plague.
Happily, for dogs or cats who are spayed before they are sexually mature (the usual
timeframe for a spay is before 6 months of age) mammary cancer is virtually unheard of.
Learn more about the specifics of the disease and treatment in dogs and cats.
The terminology surrounding lumps, tumors and cancer can be a little daunting
sometimes, and is often a source of confusion. One thing to keep in mind is that the word
tumor does not always mean cancer. Cancer implies malignancy, or a predilection to grow
rapidly and spread to other parts of the body: it’s a process known as metastasis, in which
a tumor says, in essence, I’m outta here and decides to infiltrate new and exciting regions
for growth. A tumor can be benign or malignant, but cancer is always malignant.
So how do we know which
lump is bad, and which is not
likely to be a problem for our
pets? Sadly, there’s no easy
way. Any lump found on a
pet’s mammary gland has
the potential to be
cancerous, so having your
veterinarian remove the
lump (or a piece of it, in what
is known as an incisional
biopsy) and submit it for
analysis is an important part
of keeping your pets safe
from this disease. A biopsy is
a piece of tissue that can be
preserved and looked at
under a microscope by a
pathologist to determine
what the lump is (mammary tissue vs. some other tissue that just decided on a whim to
form a lump) and whether the lump is cancerous, or as doctors call it, malignant. You can’t
tell if tissue is cancerous just by the way it looks, how it feels or where it is.
There is one intermediate step that can offer information to your veterinarian on how
extensive or radical surgery to remove the lump should be. This is known as a fine needle
aspirate, or FNA. With an FNA, you don’t get a piece of the mass, you just suck some
cells up into the needle and place them onto a slide. It is much less invasive and doesn’t
usually require any sedation or anesthesia, but the trade-off is that it is a less accurate
test and less likely than a surgical biopsy to tell you the badness level of the tumor. An
FNA is actually notoriously unreliable for mammary masses as far as predicting
malignancy but can help make sure the lump is from mammary tissue and not something
else that set up shop in the same area.
Medicine is often like that – the invasive stuff is the most accurate, and the easiest stuff
gives you the least useable information. It’s like food where the good stuff tastes bad and
the stuff that tastes great kills you. The universe can seem like a vast, cruel joke some
days.
I know this sounds complex, intimidating and potentially invasive – not to mention
expensive. The good news is that the take-home on this is pretty simple: spay your pet
before she goes into heat, unless you have a rock-solid breeding plan for your purebred
pet, and have your veterinarian check out any suspicious lumps. That’s about it. Luckily,
your trusted family veterinarian has the skills and knowledge to guide you and your pet
through this maze to ensure the highest degree of success.

8/2/25, 10:25 PM Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=5138471&ind=35&objTypeID=1007 2/3
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5138471&pid=19239
fa655551-54fa-4ba4-adcc-5f367357f734.1754153712
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:25 PM Breast Cancer Happens in Companion Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=5138471&ind=35&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Your veterinarian will talk to you about various treatment options based on the
type of cancer your pet has.
Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent
Christy Corp-Minamiji, DVM
Revised: June 17, 2024
Published: March 09, 2015
Like people, our pets’ bodies develop cancer cells throughout their lifetime. In the lucky
ones, these cells remain dormant and no malignancy ever grows; in others, the cells go
mad systematically. The cellular delinquents bust past the body’s natural immune system,
as though a gate was left open, burgeoning into abnormal cells. They do not surrender to
a healthy cell’s programmed death, so the cellular delinquents multiply as they crowd out
healthy cells. They don’t follow any rules and ignore signals that they are overfilling the
place. For nourishment, they cause new blood vessels to form to supply them, which
should be supplying healthy tissue.
These marauding
delinquents can grow
anywhere in our pets’
bodies, just like us: lungs,
liver, spleen, kidney,
intestines, bone, blood,
brain, skin, muscle, mouth,
nail beds, and so on.
What signs of cancer can
we look for in our pets?
Lumps and bumps
that don’t go away
Wounds that don’t heal, particularly if their appearance is changing
Limping or other signs of pain while walking, running, or jumping
Unexplained weight loss
Less energy, less willingness to play, walk, and run
Difficulty breathing
Bleeding, including nosebleeds, skin bruises, blood in stool, urine, or vomit;
pale gums can show blood loss
Bad odors from the mouth, ears, or anus
Abnormal discharge such as blood or pus; vomiting or diarrhea, particularly if
accompanied by other signs
Behavior changes such as lethargy, depression, lack of appetite, snapping
Changes in urinary and bowel habits, such as straining or going too often
They range from subtle to more obvious that something is going wrong. Signs of cancer
can be similar to ones seen in other diseases, so don’t assume your pet has cancer if you
see one. Also don’t assume that age alone is causing lethargy or lack of playfulness.
If your pet has one or more of these signs, it’s time for a visit to the veterinarian: catching
any disease process early is best because it’s easier to treat. With cancer, early detection
can sometimes make the difference between good health at a reasonable cost and an

8/2/25, 10:25 PM Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=6664598&ind=36&objTypeID=1007 1/2
expensive illness that may include death.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6664598&pid=19239
fa655551-54fa-4ba4-adcc-5f367357f734.1754153737
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:25 PM Cancer is a Cellular Delinquent - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=6664598&ind=36&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Additional Resources
Lymphoma
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma in Dogs
Lymphoma Treatment Includes
Nutritional Therapy for Dogs and Cats
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats
and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 15, 2021
Published: June 28, 2016
The word chemotherapy conjures up
images of unpleasant toxicity but in
reality, chemotherapy just refers to the
use of medications, as opposed to
radiation or surgery, to treat
cancer. Unpleasant side effects are
actually unusual for pets, not just from
species differences but because diseasefree duration goals are different when
normal lifespans are shorter. Protocols
can involve combinations of different
medications. (Acronyms for these drugs form the name of the protocol such as COP,
CHOP, or MOPP. Protocols can also be single agent, meaning only one drug is used. In
general, the chance of achieving remission is good no matter which protocol is used, but
the duration of remission will depend on the type of lymphoma and which protocol is
selected. There is some controversy as to whether chemotherapy protocols should be
used indefinitely or for a finite period of time.
Eventually, it can be expected that remission will be lost and a rescue protocol will be
needed to achieve a second remission. The second remission is generally more difficult to
achieve and will not last as long as the first remission. The medications selected for
rescue will need to be different from those used in the original protocol because the tumor
can be assumed to be resistant to the drugs it has already been exposed to.
The following list includes medications that are commonly used to treat lymphoma in dogs
and cats. Your veterinarian or veterinary oncologist will likely be suggesting a protocol
involving one or more of these. Use the links below to obtain more information.
Adriamycin / Doxorubicin
Chlorambucil (Leukeran)
Cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan)
Dacarbazine
L-Asparaginase (Elspar)
Lomustine (CCNU)
Methotrexate

8/2/25, 10:26 PM Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=7411130&ind=37&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Prednisone / Prednisolone
Procarbazine
Rabacfosadine (conditionally approved for treatment)
Verdinexor (Laverdia-CA1) (conditionally approved for treatment)
Vincristine (Oncovin)
Related resources
Lymphoma in Cats - August 20, 2024
Lymphoma in Dogs - September 16, 2023
Lymphoma - September 16, 2023
Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - November 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=7411130&pid=19239
fa655551-54fa-4ba4-adcc-5f367357f734.1754153762
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:26 PM Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=7411130&ind=37&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Effects of Spay and Neuter Timing on Cancer in Dogs
Heather Howell, LVT, RVT, MBA
Revised: October 25, 2024
Published: December 29, 2020
Even though veterinary recommendations
for spaying and neutering pets have become
common and there is a lot of information
available about its benefits, you may have
questions or concerns about how it could
affect your dog long term. You may also
wonder if there is a correct age for spaying
and neutering since recommendations seem
to vary. This issue has been studied but
there are no general recommendations
because the decision is based on multiple
factors. Here we explore the issues and
emphasize that it is always best to consult
your veterinarian regarding the best timing
for your individual pet.
Decreased Mammary Cancer
Besides the behavioral benefits seen with spaying and neutering, most studies cited for
spaying dogs before their first heat emphasize the decreased risk of mammary gland
tumors (both benign and malignant cancers). Several studies have concluded that female
dogs are significantly less likely to develop mammary tumors when they are spayed and
timing of the surgery relative to the dog's age makes a difference. The most protective
effects were found with female dogs spayed prior to their first heat.
Other Cancers
On the other hand, there have been studies cited that discuss increased risk of other
cancers when dogs are spayed young. These studies were done on a small number of
relatively young dogs. Since the average age of diagnosis for mammary tumors is over 8
years, studies that looked at rates in younger dogs were unlikely to show the true
incidence. These studies also examined the risk of other cancers developing, but they
may have falsely exaggerated a non-existent effect, since studies with a relatively small
group size are much more likely to be affected by chance. Another study found that age,
not sexual status or timing of desexing, determined the probability of Golden Retrievers
dying from cancer.
This topic is complicated since the evidence is still inconsistent and contradictory from
study to study. As a pet owner, you may be looking for concrete statements for or against
desexing your pet, or regarding the timing of desexing. Various cancers have seemed
more prevalent in desexed animals in some studies, but not in others, which makes it
difficult to give concrete, unbiased recommendations. For example, the risk of
osteosarcoma, mast cell tumor, lymphoma, urogenital cancer, and hemangiosarcoma may
(or may not) increase when dogs are desexed prior to one year. Most of these studies are

8/2/25, 10:26 PM Effects of Spay and Neuter Timing on Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=10002077&ind=38&objTypeID=1007 1/2
small (which can lead to inaccurate results) and many of the studies with these
conclusions did not control for breeds predisposed to cancers, which they and others have
identified as independent risk factors.
Breed Specific Spay/Neuter Age Guidelines
An analysis of multiple breeds was done by Hart and colleagues at UC Davis in 2020, and
breed-specific guidelines for spay/neuter age were published. Critics of the breed-specific
guidelines for spay/neuter age found the study to be problematic based on their methods,
groupings, and means of applying analysis differently to different breeds. Although
suggested guidelines for age of desexing of each breed examined were provided, the
study did conclude that in most breeds examined, the risk of developing problems was not
affected by age of neutering.
Spayed/Neutered Dogs and Lifespans
After reading this, you may be concerned that neutering or spaying your dog will cause
long-term problems. However, it is important to note that multiple studies have looked at
the impact of desexing on mortality from all causes and determined that desexed male
and female dogs actually do have slightly longer median lifespans than their intact
counterparts. Intact females had shorter lifespans than all other genders, and spayed
females lived the longest. Even in a study that specifically looked at Golden Retrievers
diagnosed with cancer, the spayed females lived longer than intact females.
The best timing for spaying or neutering your pet may depend on other factors specific to
your situation, such as your dog's behavioral tendencies (roaming, marking, aggression),
environmental factors (housing, fencing, space), and the legal requirements of the
jurisdiction where you live. This continues to be an evolving topic with many
considerations. The World Small Animal Veterinary Association (WSAVA) issued
reproductive control guidelines in 2024 that challenged traditional thinking regarding
spaying and neutering and prompted varied reactions from veterinarians, particularly in the
sheltering community. As with any medical decision, your best resource for determining
the appropriate timing of spaying/neutering is your pet's veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10002077&pid=19239
fa655551-54fa-4ba4-adcc-5f367357f734.1754153789
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:26 PM Effects of Spay and Neuter Timing on Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=10002077&ind=38&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Pericytes grip and support the blood vessel.
Graphic courtesy Wendy Brooks, DVM
Hemangiopericytoma in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 13, 2024
Published: August 18, 2003
The hemangiopericytoma is a common tumor in
dogs, usually arising on the limbs and appearing
as a round nodule under the skin. It derives from a
cell called a pericyte that acts to support blood
vessel capillaries throughout the body (see
below). A hemangiopericytoma develops when a
pericyte somewhere in the body develops a
chromosomal abnormality (either a missing
chromosome or an extra one) and begins to
proliferate and invade other local tissues. The
hemangiopericytoma is classified as a type of soft
tissue sarcoma and is considered malignant
because of its ability to invade and obliterate local
tissues; however, it rarely spreads to distant body
sites. Hemangiopericytomas can appear bald,
pigmented, or even ulcerated. In later stages, the
hemangiopericytoma can be quite large and is sometimes mistaken for a benign lipoma
(fatty tumor) if tests are not performed.
What is a Pericyte?
Consider that everyone began life as a single cell. This cell divided over and over and
became many cells. As time continued, we became groups of different types of cells.
Eventually, we became embryos, fetuses, and finally infants with complete organ systems
and different tissues all derived from one original cell. During the course of this amazing
development, some cells do not specialize fully in specific tissues. They stay
"undifferentiated" and can in the future specialize into whatever type of cell our body might
require at that time. We have cells throughout our bodies that simply stay put at different
stages of embryonic development. Pericytes are such cells. They have arrested their
development from embryonic times and are located all over the body, supporting blood
vessels and waiting for a signal to develop. If the body has a need, pericytes can develop
into new muscle tissue or new blood vessel tissue. A pathology instructor once described
the pericyte as perhaps not the Adam and Eve of our bodies but more like Abraham: not
the first or even second generation by any means, but ancient.
What is a Hemangiopericytoma?
A hemangiopericytoma is a tumor arising from pericytes associated with blood vessels.
Instead of forming a useful tissue, these pericytes form tumors because improper cell
division leaves them with chromosome damage.
Is it Cancer?

8/2/25, 10:27 PM Hemangiopericytoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951962&ind=39&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Photo of a hemangiopericytoma tumor on a dog's
lower leg. (The forceps are included to show size.)
Photo courtesy of: Dr. Duane Moore, DVM
The hemangiopericytoma does not spread
through the body in the way you normally think
of cancer. It does, however, tend to recur at its
original site. When it recurs, it tends to grow
back more deeply rooted and more difficult to
remove than it was originally.
If left alone it will continue to grow inexorably,
usually over years, until it invades a part of the
body that does not have extra space to allow a
tumor; usually, the chest cavity is the closest
such area.
What Are the Treatment Options?
Treatment centers around local tumor control,
and this usually means surgery. The hemangiopericytoma has microscopic tentacles,
making it hard to remove completely. Plus, the fact that it is a blood vessel tumor means
that bleeding can be intense and difficult to control. The goal is to remove as much of the
tumor as possible without risk. The first step involves some sort of biopsy, either an
attempt at removing the whole tumor or simply a mission to take a small piece and identify
the tumor depending on the tumor size and amount of bleeding encountered. Once the
growth is confirmed as hemangiopericytoma and the bulk of the tumor has been removed,
the focus becomes slowing its growth and preventing recurrence. Here are the options
after the initial surgery.
Radiation therapy
The hemangiopericytoma is responsive to radiation therapy. This means that
the cure rate after radiotherapy is 80-90%, assuming the tumor has been
reduced to microscopic size after surgical removal. Only the tumor site receives
radiation in this type of therapy, so the patient does not become ill, though the
area of radiation exposure will probably lose the ability to grow hair.
Effective (sometimes called "definitive") radiation therapy, unfortunately, requires 15-
18 treatments, and the total cost can easily run $4000-$4500. For radiotherapy to be
effective, the tumor must first be surgically removed, leaving no visible remaining
tumor. Otherwise, the tumor will be too big for a definitive response.
If the goal is not to cure the tumor but to simply slow its recurrence, palliative
radiation is an option. This costs substantially less and typically involves a month of
weekly treatments. This might not be able to prevent regrowth but could certainly
postpone it. Given that the tumor is slow growing to begin with, postponing regrowth
might be as good as a definitive response.
Leave tumor alone for now and attempt another surgical removal when it recurs.
One option is to wait and see if the tumor regrows (it usually does). When it
regrows, it can be re-removed; however, when it re-grows, it is usually more
difficult to remove. Every time it is removed, it re-grows more invasively making
the next surgery more difficult. If a second surgery removes the visible portions
of the tumor successfully, radiation therapy can again be considered as above
with similar success rate.
Leave tumor alone, let it grow back, do nothing.
This may be a realistic option for an elderly patient as the hemangiopericytoma
typically requires 6-12 months to grow back and longer to become disfiguring or
invasive. An older patient may die of old age before the hemangiopericytoma
comes back in a meaningful way. For a younger patient, however, this is

8/2/25, 10:27 PM Hemangiopericytoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951962&ind=39&objTypeID=1007 2/4
probably a poor option as the tumor will eventually become, as mentioned,
inoperable, disfiguring, and lethal. In this situation, a more definitive plan is
better.
Allow the tumor to recur, then amputate the limb (assuming the tumor is on a
limb)
This may seem extreme, but it certainly resolves the lethal aspect of the tumor
in a curative manner. The hemangiopericytoma does not spread distantly in the
body, so amputation of the limb achieves a cure and does so far less
expensively than radiotherapy, though amputation is a major surgery and is not
without substantial expense and adjustment to the three-legged lifestyle.
Metronomic Chemotherapy
Metronomic chemotherapy involves the use of chemotherapy drugs at very
small doses daily or at least much more frequently than the traditional
chemotherapy protocols would have them used. For incompletely removed
hemangiopericytomas, metronomic chemotherapy aims to hamper the regrowth
of the remaining tumor's blood supply. The most common protocols use a
combination of cyclophosphamide and piroxicam. This type of treatment is not
generally helpful when a grossly visible tumor is present but is best for
preventing the re-growth of a tumor after all its visible portions have been
removed.
What about Inoperable Tumors?
Some tumors are just too big, are located in a body area not amenable to surgery, or the
patient has concurrent problems that make surgery problematic. If surgery is not practical,
there are still treatment options to consider:
Palliative radiation therapy
As described above, a less aggressive radiation plan can be used to retard the
growth of the tumor. This can be very helpful in managing pain, preventing
ulceration, and slowing enlargement of the mass. A typical plan might be
weekly treatments for a one-month period.
Electrochemotherapy
This newly emerging technique is for managing solid tumors without surgery.
Here, electricity is used to temporarily generate pores in the tumor through
which chemotherapy can penetrate. This method provides much more efficient
chemotherapy penetration than simply letting the tumor take up the
chemotherapy agent naturally. The strength of the electricity can also be strong
enough to damage the tumor. At this time, electrochemotherapy is only
available in some facilities.
Not all veterinarians are comfortable treating a hemangiopericytoma. Discuss with your
veterinarian whether a referral to a specialist would be best for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951962&pid=19239
fa655551-54fa-4ba4-adcc-5f367357f734.1754153816

8/2/25, 10:27 PM Hemangiopericytoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951962&ind=39&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:27 PM Hemangiopericytoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951962&ind=39&objTypeID=1007 4/4
This radiograph of a dog's abdomen shows a
dramatically enlarged spleen. The spleen is
outlined. Photo by MarVistaVet
Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and
Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 28, 2020
Published: May 25, 2003
Hemangiosarcoma is a malignant tumor of blood
vessel cells. With the exception of the skin form -
which can often be eliminated by surgery - a
diagnosis of hemangiosarcoma is bad news. This
tumor is associated with serious internal bleeding
and rapid internal spread. Fortunately, it is not a
completely without therapy options and, as long as
expectations are realistic, temporary remissions
are possible.
When found internally, this tumor is associated
with serious internal bleeding and rapid internal
spread. Treatment options and prognosis depend
on the location involved. Hemangiosarcoma is a
common tumor in dogs but we have included
feline information at the end of this article.
Hemangiosarcoma in Dogs
Hemangiosarcoma can theoretically arise from any tissue where there are blood vessels
(which amounts to anywhere in the body) but there are three classical locations that
account for most cases:
Skin and subcutaneous forms
Splenic forms
Heart-based forms
The Skin Forms
The skin forms of hemangiosarcoma are the best types to have as they are the most
easily removed surgically and thus have the greatest potential for complete cure.
The skin forms of hemangiosarcoma are classified as either dermal and subcutaneous
(also called hypodermal). The true skin form looks like a rosy red or even black growth on
the skin. This form is frequently associated with sun exposure and thus tends to form on
non-haired or sparsely haired skin, such as on the abdomen, or on areas with white fur.
Dogs with short white-haired fur (such as Dalmatians and pit bull terriers) are predisposed
to developing this tumor. Approximately one-third of cases will spread internally in a
malignant way if given enough time, so it is important to remove such growths promptly.
The biggest problem with the dermal hemangiosarcoma is that it frequently arises in
multiple spots within a broader expense of skin. Isolated growths can be easily removed
but when a large area of skin is involved, surgical removal becomes trickier and often

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951909&ind=40&objTypeID=1007 1/5
multiple surgeries are needed to remove multiple small tumors.
The dermal hemangiosarcoma has a fair prognosis as long as it is removed before it can
invade to the subcutaneous tissues.
Subcutaneous or Hypodermal Hemangiosarcoma
Hemangiosarcomas that develop in the subcutaneous tissue (not on the skin but under it)
or spread to the subcutaneous area from the outer skin behave more malignantly. The
overlying skin is often totally normal on top of a subcutaneous hemangiosarcoma and
often the surgeon is surprised to find a dark blood-red growth under the skin when the
tumor is removed. A subcutaneous hemangiosarcoma should be treated as cancer and an
oncologist should be consulted for therapy beyond surgical removal.
Since up to 60 percent of hypodermal hemangiosarcomas spread internally,
staging becomes important after this tumor is identified (see below).
Surgery alone has been associated with a 172-day (approximately 6 month)
median survival time.
What to Know When a Skin Growth Biopsy Comes Back as Hemangiosarcoma
The biopsy report will indicate whether or not all of the growth was removed. If the tissue
completely surrounding the growth is normal, this indicates that the growth has been
removed completely and that it should not grow back.
Because the subcutaneous form of hemangiosarcoma wants to spread, staging is a good
idea to determine the extent of the disease. Knowing how far the tumor has spread will
establish appropriate treatment options and provide information on life-expectancy.
Chest radiographs: hemangiosarcoma tends to spread to the lungs. Advanced
tumor spread can be found with this simple test. (Spots of tumor spread must
be 3 mm in diameter to be large enough to be visible on a radiograph.)
Ultrasound of the belly: specifically the spleen. Even a small splenic
hemangiosarcoma should be detectable with ultrasound.
Ultrasound of the heart: even a small heart-based hemangiosarcoma should be
detectable with ultrasound.
After staging, consultation with an oncology specialist is likely to provide the most up-todate recommendations.
Hemangiosarcoma of the Spleen
The spleen is a fairly deep-seated abdominal organ that tends to go unnoticed unless it
grows unusually large. Splenic growths have the unfortunate tendency to break open and
bleed profusely regardless of whether they are benign or malignant. While a splenectomy
(removal of the spleen) certainly ends the prospect of this type of life-threatening sudden
bleed, splenic hemangiosarcoma is still a rapidly spreading malignancy.
When a splenic mass is detected, it may not be possible to tell before a splenectomy
whether or not the mass is malignant (though certainly basic testing is done in an attempt
to determine this). Chest radiographs are generally performed pre-operatively to check for
evidence of cancer spread as well as for evidence of a concurrent heart-based tumor
(heart-based hemangiosarcoma and splenic hemangiosarcoma occur together in 8
percent of splenic hemangiosarcoma patients). If possible, abdominal ultrasound can be
done to look for tumor spread to other organs prior to surgical exploration. If tumor spread
is evident, it may not be worth continuing on to surgery and certainly if tumor spread is not
evident, that does not mean that the tumor is benign. The spleen will need to be removed
and sent to the lab for analysis in order to determine if it is benign or malignant.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951909&ind=40&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Median survival with surgery only (i.e. no chemotherapy) is 19 to 86 days for
hemangiosarcoma. Benign hemangioma, however, is cured with surgical
removal. It may not be possible to tell benign hemangioma from malignant
hemangiosarcoma without removing the spleen and sending it to the lab.
Chemotherapy extends survival to approximately 3-6 months on the average,
assuming there is no evidence of tumor spread at the start. Metronomic
chemotherapy protocols (smaller doses and fewer side effects) show similar
survival statistics compared with more conventional chemotherapy protocols.
About 40 percent of bleeding splenic tumors are benign hemangioma and 60
percent are malignant hemangiosarcomas.
Many patients are bleeding internally at the time of diagnosis and require
emergency surgery.
Because there is so much potential to bleed during surgery, even the patients
who are not actively bleeding may need a blood transfusion before surgery.
Obviously, this is a highly malignant tumor with limited treatment options. Often a pet
owner has never heard of this tumor until a beloved pet is suddenly in the middle of an
internal bleeding crisis and decisions must be made quickly. Clearly, the best outcome
results when the tumor turns out to be benign but, as mentioned, it may take a risky and
expensive surgery to determine this.
Any breed of dog can be affected but a predisposition has been identified in the German
shepherd dog, the golden retriever, and the Labrador retriever. Median age at the time of
diagnosis is 10 years.
Yunnan Baiyo: A Chinese Herbal
It is worth mentioning this product as it may be the only option for a dog that is not going
to have surgery. A splenic tumor will periodically bleed and clot again and again until the
point comes when the bleed is simply too big and the patient succumbs to the blood loss.
This herb has been found to improve clotting tendencies and may give the patient an edge
against the tumor. Ask your veterinarian for instructions on how to use this product. It
comes as either a powder or in capsules.
A bleeding episode will manifest as weakness, chill and pale gums. A snug bandage wrap
around the belly may stop the bleeding in the home setting. Obviously, this kind of first aid
approach is not a replacement for emergency medical treatment but if you are doing home
hospice care, it may be appropriate.
Heart-Based Hemangiosarcoma
Like the splenic hemangiosarcoma, the heart-based hemangiosarcoma exerts its lifethreatening effects by bleeding. Tumors are generally located around the right side of the
heart base.
The heart is enclosed in a sac called the pericardium. When the hemangiosarcoma
bleeds, the blood fills up the pericardium until it is so full that the heart inside is under so
much pressure that it has no room to fill with the blood it needs to pump.
In chest radiographs, the heart looks globoid (spherical). In fact, the heart is of normal
shape but all that can be seen is the large, round heart shadow of the pericardium filled to
capacity with blood. Ultrasound is needed to truly see the effusion.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951909&ind=40&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Photo by Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
This condition, if allowed to progress, results in an emergency circulating collapse called a
pericardial tamponade and can only be relieved by tapping the pericardium with a needle
and withdrawing the excess fluid.
63 percent of heart-based hemangiosarcomas have evidence of tumor spread
at the time they are discovered.
Survival time for surgery alone (removing the pericardium and snipping off the
heart-based hemangiosarcoma) is approximately 1 to 3 months. In a study
published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association in
February 2005, 23 dogs with this type of tumor were studied. Of the dogs that
had surgery, approximately half of them had some sort of post-operative
complication, though most complications were minor; and 87 percent survived
and were released to go home from the hospital. Median survival time for dogs
that had surgery without chemotherapy was 43 to 118 days (depending if the
tumor was in the right atrium or just in the auricle, which is the small ear-like
area adjacent to the atrium).
Eight of the dogs that survived surgery went on to receive chemotherapy and
these individuals had much longer survival times (median survival of 175 days
vs. 42 days for dogs who had surgery without chemotherapy).
Chemotherapy is necessary to create a substantial improvement in survival time. The
most current protocol involves injectable Adriamycin (doxorubicin) every three weeks and
oral cyclophosphamide at home for three days out of the week.
On the Horizon
Immunotherapy is an active area of research with the idea being to find a vaccine that will
induce the patient's own immune system to seek and attack the tumor. This area appears
promising but is still in an experimental stage. Antiangiogenic therapy involves reducing
the tumor's ability to generate blood vessels to feed itself. This area is also investigational
at this time. It may be possible for your pet to participate in a funded study.
Hemangiosarcoma in Cats
As cancers go in cats, hemangiosarcoma is
not a common one as it is for dogs but cats
still can get one. There appear to be four
main types of hemangiosarcoma in cats:
Dermal (in the skin)
Subcutaneous (under the skin)
Visceral (involving internal organs)
Oral (usually growing from the
gums)
Recent studies indicate that the dermal and
subcutaneous forms are the most common.
These forms tend to develop on the head,
which suggests that sun exposure is a risk
factor. For the dermal and subcutaneous forms of feline hemangiosarcoma, surgical
removal is the chief treatment and is the most likely to be curative for dermal forms.
Subcutaneous hemangiosarcomas are more difficult to remove completely and have a 60
percent recurrence rate after surgery. The visceral form is the most aggressive form with

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951909&ind=40&objTypeID=1007 4/5
approximately 30 percent of cats being far gone enough to warrant euthanasia at the time
of initial diagnosis (or having already died with the diagnosis being made on a postmortem exam).
In dogs, adding chemotherapy to surgery has been helpful in extending the disease-free
interval. Certainly protocols are available for cats, but so few cats have been treated that
statistics comparing protocols or even comparing surgery plus chemotherapy treatment
vs. surgery alone are not available.
One useful finding that has emerged from retrospective studies is the significance of the
mitotic figure count on the biopsy sample. A mitotic figure is a cell that is in the process of
cell division when it is fixed in formaldehyde. Since rapid cell division is a feature of
malignancy, the number of mitotic figures seen on a slice of tissue can indicate how
aggressive a tumor is. Apparently more than three mitotic figures per high power
microscope field indicates a much shorter survival time than would be achieved in a case
with a smaller number of mitotic figures. The mitotic figure count is reported by the
pathologist when the biopsy sample is read, although it may have to be specifically
requested.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951909&pid=19239
7303049d-c980-4ad9-8d02-2206b17a1ac9.1754154185
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Hemangiosarcoma is Blood or Skin Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951909&ind=40&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Illustration by Tamara Rees/VIN
Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 30, 2023
Published: November 29, 2010
The pancreas is a small, light pink
glandular organ nestled under the
stomach and alongside the duodenum
(upper small intestine). The endocrine
pancreas is the part of the pancreas
that secretes hormones involved in
blood sugar regulation, such as insulin
and glucagon. The exocrine pancreas
produces enzymes we use to digest
our food. These two parts of the
pancreas are not in separate areas but
instead, these two different types of
pancreatic tissues are all mixed
together throughout the entire
pancreas.
The insulin-secreting cells are called
beta cells and are bunched in groups
called Islets of Langerhans, which are
scattered throughout the pancreatic
tissue. In some unfortunate individuals,
the beta cells become tumorous and
while the tumor itself can be small, its
effects are large because it produces
large amounts of insulin. Insulin-secreting tumors are called insulinomas.
What Happens to the Patient?
Insulin is a hormone secreted to store sugar. Normally it is secreted in response to the
carbohydrates in a meal; it allows the extra sugar to be removed from the bloodstream
and stored as starch and fat, thus keeping the blood sugar level within the normal range.
The function of normal islets of Langerhans is tightly regulated by the body but if there is
an insulin-secreting tumor, the tumor is not subject to this regulation. Insulin secretion runs
wild in this situation and low blood sugar (hypoglycemia) becomes a problem.
The hypoglycemia in this situation is typically severe, most commonly resulting in
seizures. Other clinical features include listlessness, twitching, trembling, apparently
drunken or wobbly gait, and reduced mental awareness.
Testing
One of the first steps in evaluating any sick patient is a basic blood panel. Patients
presented during a seizure are commonly screened for low blood sugar. Low blood sugar
is typically recognized early in the diagnostic process, although if the blood sugar has had

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952990&ind=41&objTypeID=1007 1/5
time to recover (if the patient has eaten or depending on what emergency medications
have been given), the situation may be ambiguous. Sometimes the patient must return to
the veterinarian in a fasted state to get an accurate blood sugar assessment.
Assuming hypoglycemia is confirmed, the history and basic physical examination
generally rule out some obvious potential causes. Some examples of fairly obvious
potential causes of hypoglycemia include:
Toy breed puppy hypoglycemia
Diabetic patient possibly overdosing on insulin
Pregnant female in labor having a difficult delivery
Extreme exercise exertion, as in hunting dog hypoglycemia
Starvation
Overwhelming bacterial infection
Other not-so-obvious causes of hypoglycemia include liver disease, insulinoma, and
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s Disease). The testing that is commonly needed beyond
the basic panel would include a resting cortisol level, as a normal level largely rules out
hypoadrenocorticism; an ACTH stimulation test, which is the definitive test for ruling out
hypoadrenocorticism; an insulin level, which must be measured at the time the patient is
hypoglycemic; and possibly a bile acids liver function test if it is not clear if liver disease
has been adequately ruled out by earlier findings.
What is Hypoadrenocorticism?
Hypoadrenocorticism is a deficiency in the production of cortisol, more commonly known
as cortisone. Cortisol is produced by the adrenal gland and one of its functions is to raise
blood sugar in anticipation of a fight or flight response. In simpler terms, if the body is
anticipating exercise, such as fighting for one’s life or escaping a predator, blood sugar
must be readily available for the muscles to burn. Cortisol is secreted to make that
happen. (It also makes other metabolic adaptations happen but that is a story for another
time.) Poor cortisol secretion can create episodes of hypoglycemia and since
hypoadrenocorticism is easily treated once identified, it is important to rule it out in a
hypoglycemic patient.
The Insulin Level
To be meaningful in testing for insulinoma, the insulin level must be drawn when the
patient’s blood sugar level is less than 60 mg/dl (3.33 mmol/L) because the insulin level is
interpreted in light of the blood sugar level. In other words, an insulin level might be within
the normal range for a normal patient but might be inappropriately high in a hypoglycemic
patient.
Ultrasound
Once you are confident that excessive insulin is being produced, the next step is
ultrasound. There are two reasons for this:
To locate the tumor if you are planning surgery
To obtain a prognosis even if you are not planning surgery
If you already know too much insulin is being produced, you can be pretty sure you are
tracking down an insulinoma but if a diagnosis is not clear after all the blood testing
described above, ultrasound is still a good next choice. Tumors other than insulinoma can
cause hypoglycemia (though they will not produce excess insulin) and ultrasound will be
helpful in finding them. Most notoriously hepatoma (also known as hepatocellular
carcinoma) and smooth muscle tumors (both benign and malignant and usually found in
the spleen) also cause hypoglycemia. Other tumors potentially can consume enough
blood sugar to create hypoglycemia and ultrasound would be an excellent way to find any.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952990&ind=41&objTypeID=1007 2/5
An ultrasound is being conducted. Photo courtesy of DVMSound.
With ultrasound, lesions in the pancreas as small as 7 mm in diameter can be identified
and, in one study, it was able to locate the pancreatic tumor in 75% of cases.
CT Scan
CT scanning is not as readily available as ultrasound, but it does offer some benefits over
ultrasound if it is possible to do a CT scan instead. With ultrasound, we want to confirm
that there is a tumor in the pancreas and localize it so the surgeon will know where to find
it without too much manipulation (which can be inflammatory to the pancreas). We also
want to find any evidence of tumor spread and determine the extent of it. It turns out that
CT is much more sensitive than ultrasound when it comes to getting these important
answers. Basically, any information that one can get with ultrasound can be obtained by
CT. The disadvantage of CT would be that it requires general anesthesia, plus CT is
significantly more expensive.
Staging Insulinoma
Unfortunately, most insulinomas
are malignant but that does not
mean they are not treatable. There
is more to prognosis than just
determining if a tumor is benign or
malignant and this is where staging
comes in. Insulinomas can be
confined to the pancreas (Stage I),
spread to local lymph nodes (Stage
II), or spread distantly, usually to
the liver (Stage III). The therapy
goal is to relieve the hypoglycemia
and extend the period of normal life
quality. Depending on the therapy
selected, it is not unusual for the
Stage I and Stage II dogs to live a
year and a half or more while the
Stage III dogs are looking at less than 6 months. Imaging, whether you use CT or
ultrasound, is going to be crucial in determining a patient's stage.
After imaging has been completed, the time has come to decide about surgery.
Treatment: Surgery
Surgically removing the insulinoma is the treatment of choice. Even if a cure cannot be
achieved surgically, removing the majority of the insulin-secreting tissue should make a
big difference in the patient’s quality of life so ideally this is the best direction for therapy:
locating the tumor (which, as mentioned can be very small) by imaging and removing it.
That said, surgical removal of the tumor is not a simple surgery. Manipulating the tumor
can cause insulin surges that result in hypoglycemia during surgery; blood sugar levels
must be tightly monitored both during and after surgery. Sugar-containing IV fluids are a
must. Further, manipulating the pancreas can create inflammation (pancreatitis) which is
associated with pain and nausea.
Some patients have been exposed to excess insulin so long that their normal beta cells
require a prolonged period to recover, and during this time the patient may require insulin
injections just as a diabetic patient would.
This all sounds like a lot of risk for the treatment of a tumor with a 90 percent chance of
malignancy. However, 50 percent of dogs without evidence of tumor spread at the time of
surgery have had normal blood sugars for a year after partial removal of the pancreas.
This is an excellent statistic and is often well worth the surgery. In one study, dogs

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952990&ind=41&objTypeID=1007 3/5
receiving partial pancreas removal had a medial remission time of 496 days and the dogs
that went on to receive medical management after signs recurred had a median survival of
1316 days. Dogs with medical management alone had a median survival of 196 days.
Treatment: Medications that Manage Hypoglycemia
Medical management is helpful for patients where surgery is not considered an option due
to other risk factors, financial limitations, or a non-resectable tumor. Many months of
symptom control can be achieved with diet, steroids (hormones related to cortisol that
raise blood sugar), and an oral medication called diazoxide. Frequent small meals can be
used to keep blood sugar in a reasonable range.
If your pet seems to be disoriented from low blood sugar, this is a potential
emergency. You can give a sugar supplement like Nutrical® or Karo® syrup and
then immediately seek veterinary attention. Severe hypoglycemia (low blood
sugar) can be deadly if left untreated.
If or when frequent feedings prove inadequate, corticosteroids such as prednisone or
dexamethasone can be used to assist in raising blood sugar. Ideally, dosing is kept as
small as necessary to avoid side effects such as excessive water consumption, excessive
urination, and immune suppression.
Diazoxide is a medication that promotes blood sugar elevation through a number of
mechanisms including suppression of insulin secretions. An upset stomach is the most
common side effect of this medication and giving the medication with food can help ease
the upset. It also causes sodium retention and should not be used in heart failure patients.
Concurrent liver disease may exacerbate side effects.
Other medications such as somatostatin analogs have not been as reliable in achieving
results.
Treatment: Medications to Combat the Cancer
Since insulinoma is a cancer, drugs of chemotherapy can be useful in suppressing tumor
spread. Such medications are commonly used after surgery has removed the bulk of the
tumor or when there is evidence that the tumor has spread. One would not consider such
aggressive therapy unless a biopsy has confirmed the tumor.
Streptozocin
This drug targets beta cells of the pancreas specifically. To avoid inducing kidney failure, it
must be given with aggressive intravenous fluids, thus hospitalization is required for its
periodic use.
Other medications that have been used or are emerging include toceranib, doxorubicin,
and alloxan.
Veterinary oncologists have the most up-to-date recommendations on
chemotherapy. Ask your veterinarian if a referral to an oncologist is best for you and your
pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952990&pid=19239
7303049d-c980-4ad9-8d02-2206b17a1ac9.1754154206
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952990&ind=41&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Insulinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952990&ind=41&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 18, 2023
Published: July 31, 2009
Confirming a liver tumor requires a medical diagnostic journey starting with a sick pet or
perhaps an abnormal lab test. From these beginnings, the journey proceeds through
further blood tests and, ultimately, imaging. Through imaging of the abdomen (stomach),
the liver lobes are evaluated, and a tumor can be verified. Through imaging of the
abdomen, the liver lobes can be evaluated and a tumor verified. We will assume that you
are reading this because the diagnostic process has largely been completed, and a tumor
has been found. At this point, undoubtedly, many questions have emerged and must be
answered in order to make proper choices.
Is this a primary tumor (meaning it arose in the liver) or is it the result of cancer
spread from a primary tumor elsewhere?
Is the tumor benign or malignant?
Is the tumor of a size where surgery is a reasonable option for palliation, if not
cure?
How is the tumor affecting the day-to-day life of the pet, and how will this
change in the future?
How long will the pet be expected to live with or without treatment?
Ultrasound Can Answer Many Questions
Many of these questions can be answered by ultrasound, the most common medium for
evaluating the texture of the liver. Unlike radiography, where all soft tissue appears as the
same texture, ultrasound is able to separate out tissues depending on their water content.
This means that it is possible to see inside the liver and see if there is one tumor or many
and how much normal liver texture is left. Ultrasound can determine what organs show
tumors inside, whether or not local lymph nodes are enlarged (which could indicate
spread of the tumor), and whether or not surgery would be useful. It is also possible to
take either a needle aspirate or an actual biopsy to determine the type of tumor, and
knowing the type of tumor will answer remaining questions regarding treatment options,
survival time, etc. In other words, if an ultrasound of the liver has not been done yet, it is
time to do it.
What Happens During an Ultrasound Scan
Sedation is not usually required for imaging or even tissue sampling. The fur is shaved for
best contact with the ultrasound probe. Watch Smudge, the cat, have a liver scan in this
short video.
What is the Difference between a Needle Aspirate and a Biopsy?
A needle aspirate involves sticking a long needle into the abnormal area and withdrawing
cells for analysis. This is usually done with ultrasound guidance so as to avoid hitting any
large blood vessels and to make sure the desired area is sampled. The advantage of the

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952830&ind=42&objTypeID=1007 1/4
needle aspirate is that anesthesia or sedation of the sick patient is generally not
necessary, there is less potential for bleeding than with biopsy, and results may be
obtained as soon as overnight in many cases. The disadvantage is that the sample
obtained consists of cells only, and the architecture connecting these cells is lost.
Diagnosis will be less specific and may consist of conceptual information like benign vs.
malignant, inflammatory vs. not-inflammatory, etc. Some tumors, such as the mast cell
tumor or lymphoma, readily release their cells, and architecture is not needed for
diagnosis. Other tumors are not so readily distinguished, and there is greater potential for
a frustrating non-diagnostic sample result than there is with a biopsy.
A biopsy yields a very different sample: a chunk of tissue. In this sample, the microscopic
structures of the liver can be viewed, as can the cells infiltrating them. The architecture of
the tissue is preserved. Tumors can be graded for the degree of malignancy, plus the
specific type of tumor is revealed. The downside stems from the fact that a larger piece of
tissue is required. Clotting tests must be run prior to the procedure to ensure that the liver
will not bleed. A different type of needle is used, and some sort of sedation is typically
needed, which may add risk. Results typically take longer for a biopsy sample as the
laboratory preparation is more complicated. Expense is generally greater for biopsy than
for aspirate.
The ultrasonographer is typically in a good position to determine the best balance of risk,
expense, and potential information yield.
A correct diagnosis is obtained in 60% of needle aspirates of the liver. A correct
diagnosis is obtained in 90% of liver biopsies. Bleeding occurs in 5 percent of
sampled patients, with bleeding graded as moderate in those that had biopsies
and mild in those that had aspirates.
Metastatic Cancer
If cancer is found in the liver but is believed not to have originated there, this indicates
cancer spread and advanced disease. Prognosis is poor, though what options remain
depend on the type of cancer. Metastatic disease in the liver is approximately two and a
half times more common than primary cancer in the liver, with most tumors having spread
from the spleen, pancreas, or intestinal tract.
Liver cancer is an area that not all veterinarians are comfortable treating. Discuss with
your veterinarian whether a referral to an oncologist would be best for you and your pet.
Classifying Primary Tumors of the Liver
Again, a primary liver tumor is a tumor that arose in the liver (rather than having spread
there from a primary tumor elsewhere). Primary tumors are classified by their
shape/configuration within the liver and by the type of liver tissue they originated from.
Tumors may be massive, nodular, or diffuse. The best one to have is the massive type, as
it is in one area and is thus the most amenable to surgical removal. A diffuse tumor
involves the entire liver evenly, while a nodular tumor forms discreet bumps within the
liver. While ultrasound can tell us if a tumor is massive, nodular, or diffuse, it cannot tell us
the tissue of origin.
The four tissues of origin for primary liver tumors are hepatocellular, bile duct,
neuroendocrine (also called carcinoid), and mesenchymal.
Hepatocellular Tumors (the Most Common Liver Tumors in Dogs and Cats)
There are three types of hepatocellular tumors that dogs and cats can have:
hepatocellular carcinoma (the most common hepatocellular tumor of dogs), hepatocellular
adenoma (the most common hepatocellular tumor of cats), and the hepatoblastoma
(which is exceedingly rare and has only been reported twice).

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952830&ind=42&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Dr. Brooks removes hepatocellular carcinoma. Tumor
size is characteristically large. Photo courtesy of
MarVistaVet
The hepatocellular adenoma is benign and does not cause illness. It might cause some
blood changes that in turn can trigger a medical work up, but if a biopsy turns up this
tumor in an otherwise healthy pet, the news is good and nothing bad should be expected
to come of it. Alternatively, if this diagnosis is made in a pet that is sick, the illness
probably cannot be blamed on this tumor and a further search for the right diagnosis is
warranted.
The hepatocellular carcinoma is an important tumor of dogs and cats, not only because it
is moderately common but because it tends to be amenable to surgery even though it is
malignant. In humans, this tumor often has a viral basis (i.e. one of the hepatitis viruses)
as well as an association with cirrhosis (scarring in the liver) but in dogs and cats neither
of these associations holds true.
Most hepatocellular carcinomas (50-80%) are massive, 16-25% are nodular, and 19% are
diffuse. In dogs, the rate of metastasis (cancer spread) is 90-100% for cases with either
nodular or diffuse hepatocellular carcinoma but only 37% for those with massive disease.
If the dog or cat has a massive tumor, surgery
can greatly improve life quality even if the
entire tumor cannot be removed. The
hepatocellular carcinoma grows slowly, so
surgery, while challenging, typically produces
excellent results. The risks of surgery include
bleeding, circulatory compromise to the
remaining liver portions, reduced liver function
after surgery, and transient low blood sugar.
The time of greatest risk and concern is the
time of the surgery and during surgical
recovery. After recovery, one study found a
median survival time of 1460 days (4 years). If
the tumor is on the right side of the liver,
surgery is more difficult because the vena
cava, the largest vein in the body, is close by
and may bleed. The bottom line is that massive disease should be addressed with surgery
with the potential for cure, while nodular or diffuse disease has a poor prognosis.
Bile Duct Tumors
There are two types of bile duct tumors to be had by dogs and cats: biliary adenoma
(benign) and biliary carcinoma (malignant.) The biliary adenoma is the most common
primary liver tumor in cats and accounts for over 50 percent of all feline primary liver
tumors. They are cystic in structure, meaning they tend to be large and fluid-filled. They do
not cause problems until they are so big that they press on other organs, but because
they are fluid-filled, the fluid can be periodically sucked out with ultrasound guidance to
restore health, or the tumor can be removed surgically once and for all.
The biliary carcinoma can be massive, nodular, or diffuse. If the tumor is massive, surgery
is generally recommended, though this tumor is so malignant that survival times after
surgery are typically only about 6 months. Metastasis ultimately occurs in just under 80
percent in cats and just over 80 percent in dogs.
Neuroendocrine Tumors
These tumors are rare and usually diffuse (2/3 of cases are diffuse and 1/3 are nodular).
They tend to spread quickly and early in their course. The prognosis is poor, and because
they are rare tumors, few studies are available to suggest treatment.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952830&ind=42&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Mesenchymal Tumors
The word mesenchyma (mezz-en-KY-ma) does not exactly roll off one's tongue. The
mesenchyma of the liver is the general liver tissue separate from the bile ducts and some
other parts inside the liver. Tumors of the mesenchyma are called sarcomas.
Primary sarcomas of the liver are unusual but include hemangiosarcoma (a malignancy of
blood vessels, which is a common secondary tumor, but only 5 percent of
hemangiosarcomas arise in the liver), fibrosarcoma (malignancy of fibrous tissue),
osteosarcoma (bone malignancy), and leiomyosarcoma (smooth muscle malignancy).
Approximately 36 percent of sarcomas are massive, and 64 percent are nodular, with
metastasis found in 80-100 percent of cases, depending on the study. Massive tumors of
other types are generally amenable to surgery, but in the case of sarcomas, the tumor has
already begun to spread. Some tumors can be treated with chemotherapy.
One Last Tumor
The myelolipoma of cats is worth mentioning as it carries an excellent prognosis with
surgery. This is a benign and often large tumor consisting of fat mixed with blood cell
precursors. Current theory is that it develops in response to poor oxygenation in a
particular area. Once removed, it should not grow back.
Hopefully, this summary has been helpful in reviewing the possible tumors and what to
expect based on how they appear on ultrasound.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952830&pid=19239
7303049d-c980-4ad9-8d02-2206b17a1ac9.1754154227
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:33 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952830&ind=42&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: October 28, 2020
Lung cancer (also called pulmonary neoplasia) is caused by tumors or masses made up
of cancer cells within the lungs. Some tumors are benign, meaning that they do not invade
and damage the surrounding cells. Other lung tumors are malignant and will damage the
surrounding cells and tissues. Malignant tumors may also metastasize, or travel to other
sites and organs of the body, to cause new tumors and damage to those areas.
Lung cancer in dogs and cats can be primary, meaning the tumors originate or start
growing only in the lungs. Secondary lung cancer is the result of cancer elsewhere in the
body, which then spread to the lungs. Primary lung cancer is uncommon in our pets as
most lung cancers are from tumors spreading to other organs. In fact, if any type of cancer
is discovered in a pet, x-rays are often done on the lungs because they are one of the
most common places for cancers to spread to.
How Lung Cancer Affects Pets
When a pet has lung cancer, the lungs become damaged because the tumor crowds out
healthy lung tissue. Malignant tumor cells can also invade and damage pulmonary/lung
blood vessels and alveoli (air-containing compartments that move oxygen from the lung’s
lower airways into the bloodstream). Fluid buildup from this damage, called pleural
effusion, can develop around the lungs, compressing or squeezing them and preventing
air from moving in and out properly.
Unlike humans, dogs and cats have two left lung lobes and four right lung lobes. Cancer
can be found in one lobe, some of them, or all of them.
Symptoms of lung cancer may be subtle at first. Poor appetite and acting tired may be
noticed. Sometimes a tumor or mass is somewhere else in the body, such as in the
mammary tissue, the mouth, on a toe, or under the skin. As the disease goes on,
symptoms may include coughing, trouble breathing, loud snore-like breathing while
awake, and possibly coughing up blood.
Diagnosing Lung Cancer
If lung cancer is suspected, the veterinarian will give the pet a thorough checkup,
including listening to the heart and lungs with a stethoscope and searching carefully for
other tumors. Remember that even though lung cancer tumors are inside the lungs and
aren’t visible to the naked eye, most lung tumors are from cancer in another part of the
body. X-rays (radiographs) will be taken of the chest to see if masses are visible.
Bloodwork may be done to check the pet’s internal organ function. Sometimes, x-rays of
the bones or belly may be taken to see if the cancer originated somewhere else.
Ideally, samples of a lung tumor will be taken with a needle and syringe (known as an
aspirate) or a biopsy instrument. Either of these approaches may require heavy sedation
or anesthesia and specialized equipment. If numerous tumors are found in the lungs and
the pet’s symptoms strongly suggest cancer, this last step may not be necessary for
diagnosis.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9909168&ind=43&objTypeID=1007 1/2
If your veterinarian is not comfortable treating lung cancer or feels that their clinic does not
have the right equipment, your veterinarian may refer you to a veterinary oncologist.
Treatment
In certain cases of primary lung cancer, the tumor can be surgically removed. Sometimes
the entire lung must be removed to prevent tumor spread. Lobe removals are risky and
difficult procedures and are often performed by a specialty veterinary surgeon.
Chemotherapy and radiation are also possible options for treatment, but they are not
always successful or effective.
If treatment is not an option, supportive or palliative care therapies are the next best
options. These types of therapies help the pet feel as good as they can until the cancer
becomes severe. Combinations of pain medications, cough suppressants, antiinflammatory medications (e.g. steroids), and antibiotics to fight secondary infections
caused by the cancer may be prescribed.
If your pet has lung cancer, discuss all treatment and therapy options with your primary
care veterinarian and, if you’ve chosen to see one, a veterinary oncologist. Your
veterinarian will work with the oncologist to help you decide what is best for your pet. Pets
with lung cancer can become quite sick in a short period of time. They may die or require
humane euthanasia in as few as two to three weeks from diagnosis. Some pets can
survive longer than a few weeks, depending on tumor type and how severe the cancer is
when it initially gets diagnosed, but this is not always the case.
Each case is individual, and the outcome may – or may not – depend on treatment. Your
pet could do well for months with nothing but supportive care or may not do well with
surgery, chemotherapy and radiation. Even oncologists cannot predict the outcome with
complete accuracy. Given the uncertainty of an outcome, no decision you make about
treatment can be wrong.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9909168&pid=19239
7303049d-c980-4ad9-8d02-2206b17a1ac9.1754154256
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lung Cancer in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9909168&ind=43&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Malignant Lymphocytes
The large purple cells are circulating malignant
lymphocytes. Photo courtesy of the University of Georgia
Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 13, 2023
Published: March 12, 2007
See article summary below.
Most people have heard of leukemia and know it is a kind of cancer that people commonly
get, and that it is generally a serious and often fatal disease. This article explains what
leukemia is in dogs, and why it is bad; it also reviews the most common forms of leukemia
for dogs, called the lymphocytic forms.
Leukemia is a word describing exactly
what it is: “Leuk” means white (in this case,
white blood cells), and “mia” means blood.
Leukemia means “white blood” or, more
specifically, an overabundance of white
blood cells in the bloodstream. Now, white
blood cell counts go up in response to
infection, inflammation, allergy, and even
stress. The patient with leukemia has an
overabundance of a particular white blood
cell, but in magnitudes so great that it is
amazing that the change cannot be seen
with the naked eye. The bloodstream is
swarmed with cancerous white blood cells,
and the bone marrow from whence they
came is consumed with making cancer
cells and making very few of the other
blood cells needed to survive. In the case
of lymphocytic leukemia, the cancer cells
are of lymphocyte origin. However, there
are many other types of leukemia,
potentially one for every type of blood cell
made by the bone marrow. Lymphocytic Leukemia will be discussed in this article.
What Causes Lymphocytic Leukemia?
In dogs, there is not much of a list of possibilities, though in other species, some culprits
have been identified. It may be that these same factors are causes in dogs as well. In
humans, radiation exposure has been linked to lymphocytic leukemia development, as
has exposure to benzene. In cats, birds, and cattle, there is a “leukemia virus” (though it is
not the same virus for different animals). Not surprisingly, given the name, leukemia
viruses cause leukemia and other lymphocytic cancers, such as lymphoma.
Chronic Versus Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Lymphoblasts Under Microscope
Patient with Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia.
Photocredit: Public Domain Image from the
Armed Forces Institute of Pathology
In most of these patients, the diagnosis of lymphocytic leukemia is clear when an
impossibly high lymphocyte count is seen. A normal lymphocyte count is generally less
than 3,500 cells per microliter. In lymphocytic leukemias, lymphocyte counts over 100,000
are common.
Numbers of this magnitude generally flag the sample at the reference laboratory for
reading by a clinical pathologist (or if the initial testing is done in the veterinarian’s office,
the lymphocyte reading will cause the sample to be submitted for further analysis). The
pathologist will then visually review the slide for signs of malignancy within the cells. The
diagnosis of lymphocytic leukemia is usually fairly obvious (for exceptions see below) but
the key is to determine whether the lymphocytic leukemia is chronic or acute.
Normally, the term chronic means a process or disease that has been going on for a long
time, and acute means that the process started suddenly. For lymphocytic leukemia, these
terms have a different meaning: they refer to how mature the cancer cells look.
Lymphocytes develop from precursor cells in the bone marrow or lymph nodes and
undergo several stages of development before they are released into the bloodstream.
When a leukemia involves earlier stages of lymphocytes, it is said to be an acute
leukemia. When cells are more developed, the patient is said to have a chronic leukemia.
As a general rule, the acute leukemias act more malignantly than the chronic ones. There
is some controversy over whether acute or chronic lymphocytic leukemia is more
common.
Acute Lymphocytic Leukemia (ALL)
ALL (acute lymphocytic leukemia, also known as
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia) involves the
obliteration of the bone marrow by immature
lymphocytes called lymphoblasts, or simply blasts.
When 30 percent of the bone marrow cell
population consists of blast lymphocytes, ALL is
confirmed. In 90% of patients, the blast cells spill
out into the circulating blood, which can be
detected in a blood sample. The lymphoblast cell is
the hallmark cell of ALL.
The most common symptoms include listlessness,
poor appetite, nausea, diarrhea, and weight loss.
The average age at diagnosis is only 6.2 years,
with 27 percent of patients being under age 4
years. Over 70 percent of patients have enlarged
spleens due to cancer infiltration, over 50 percent
have enlarged livers, and 40-50 percent have
lymph node enlargement (though this last is not
dramatic). On lab tests, over 50 percent will have
anemia (red blood cell deficiency), 30-50 percent will have a platelet deficiency (platelets
are blood clotting cells so deficiency can lead to spontaneous bleeding), and 65 percent
have what is called neutropenia. Neutrophils are white blood cells that serve as the
immune system’s first line of defense. Neutropenia is a neutrophil deficiency that leaves
the patient vulnerable to infection.
Pets with ALL are generally very sick and require aggressive chemotherapy. Often, they
need blood transfusions because of the severe anemia or antibiotics to make up for the
neutropenia. Typical chemotherapy protocols include prednisone, vincristine,
cyclophosphamide, L-asparaginase, and doxorubicin. Still, even with aggressive
chemotherapy, only 30 percent of patients achieve remission, and with no therapy, most
patients die within a few weeks. Prognosis is poor when ALL is diagnosed, so it is
important to distinguish ALL from lymphoma or from more treatable forms of leukemia.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia (CLL)
As rapid and aggressive as acute lymphocytic leukemia is, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
is the opposite, with most patients having few symptoms and long survival times. The
clinical course of CLL is long, lasting months to years, with the average age at diagnosis
being 10 to 12 years. In up to 50 percent of cases, there are no symptoms of any kind at
the time of diagnosis, and the leukemia is discovered by chance on a routine blood
evaluation. In CLL, it is the sheer number of circulating cells rather than what they look
like that makes the diagnosis.
There are three forms of CLL: T cell (called T-CLL), B cell (called B-CLL), and a form
involving both B and T cells (called atypical CLL). T-cell and B-cell are the most common
forms. T-CLL has the best prognosis overall, although many factors can affect a patient’s
outcome. The type of CLL that a given patient has can be determined by blood testing
(immunophenotyping or PARR testing, which stands for PCR testing for antigen receptor
rearrangements), thus revealing the most information regarding prognosis and what to
expect.
Because CLL progresses slowly, treatment is often forgone unless one of several
conditions exists. Conditions for which treatment of CLL is recommended include
lymphocyte counts are greater than 60,000; if there are symptoms or organ enlargement;
hyperviscosity syndrome (more common with B-CLL, see below); or if other white blood
cell lines are suppressed by the tumor. If treatment is deemed necessary, common
protocols involve prednisone, chlorambucil, vincristine, and/or cyclophosphamide. Survival
times of one to three years with good quality of life are common.
Golden Retrievers and German Shepherd dogs may be predisposed to CLL. Boxers,
unfortunately, tend to get a more aggressive form of this condition and have much shorter
survival times.
What Else Could it Be?
In most cases, the diagnosis is fairly obvious, but not always. In early cases, the
lymphocyte count may not have climbed to its ultimate level, so the diagnosis may be
unclear. Similarly, in late stages, the bone marrow may be so damaged that it can no
longer turn out many cells at all. In these cases, tests may be needed because when
lymphocytic leukemia is ambiguous, there are other diseases that must be ruled out:
Lymphoma, in its most advanced stages, involves the bone marrow, and
circulating cancerous lymphocytes spill into the bloodstream. Dramatically
enlarged lymph nodes, if present, are a good indicator of lymphoma;
lymphocytic leukemia patients usually have mild or no lymph node
enlargement.
Infection with the blood parasite Ehrlichia canis can lead to high lymphocyte
counts and can be hard to distinguish from CLL. Special blood tests for
Ehrlichia may be in order.
Some other types of leukemia can be so poorly differentiated that special
stains, PCR testing, or a type of analysis called immunophenotyping might be
necessary to characterize the type of cancerous white blood cells involved.
Acute stress can cause lymphocyte counts to be as high as 15,000 cells per
microliter, but this is a temporary phenomenon.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease) can lead to a lymphocyte count of up
to 10,000 cells per microliter.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Chronic infection with fungus (if severe) or blood parasites can elevate
lymphocyte counts dramatically.
Lymphocyte counts of over 20,000 are almost always caused by lymphocytic
leukemia.
English bulldogs get a condition called polyclonal B cell lymphocytosis, which is
not a type of cancer but can look a lot like CLL and sometimes requires similar
treatment.
What is a Monoclonal Gammopathy? What is Hyperviscosity Syndrome?
The word "gammopathy" means an abnormal process is occurring, and lots of gamma
globulins are present. So, what are gamma globulins? Gamma globulins are a class of
blood proteins that include antibodies. What are antibodies? They are special proteins
made by the immune system to coat and attack organisms invading the body.
Lymphocytes produce antibodies. Infection activates the lymphocytes, and they start
proliferating and making antibodies. Each lymphocyte spawns many daughter
lymphocytes, and all the daughter lymphocytes make the same antibody. Because many
lymphocytes are stimulated, many different types of antibodies are produced. This
translates into lots of different antibodies and a high gamma globulin level. This situation is
called a "polyclonal gammopathy" because many lymphocytes are stimulated and
proliferate, and different antibodies are made.
When leukemia occurs, only one lymphocyte line proliferates: the cancerous one. If this
line of cancerous lymphocytes starts producing antibodies, only one type of antibody
results. In reference to the spectacular number of lymphocytes that comprise leukemia, all
producing antibodies, you can imagine how many antibodies are produced. Because all
the antibodies came from one single lymphocyte line, this condition would be called a
"monoclonal gammopathy."
The reason why monoclonal gammopathy is bad because it can cause hyperviscosity
syndrome. Antibodies are blood proteins, and if enough blood protein is circulated, the
blood thickens. Smaller blood vessels are too delicate to circulate thickened blood. They
break and bleeding results. The symptoms that occur depend on where these small
vessels bleed. There could be nose bleeds, seizures, blurred vision, or even blindness.
There are only a few conditions that can cause a monoclonal gammopathy.
Ehrlichia infection (the only non-tumorous cause)
Lymphoma
Plasma Cell Cancer (“multiple myeloma”)
B Cell Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia
Lymphocytic leukemia is a cancer that not all veterinarians are comfortable treating.
Discuss with your veterinarian whether a referral to a specialist would be best for you and
your pet.
In Summary:
Leukemia is a great overabundance of a particular white blood cell in the
bloodstream.
These cancer cells are from lymph, the fluid containing infection-fighting
white blood cells.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 4/6
We don’t know what causes it in dogs.
The diagnosis is clear when an impossibly high lymphocyte count is seen.
A normal count is less than 3,500 cells per microliter; in lymphocytic
leukemias, counts over 100,000 are common.
The normal meaning of acute and chronic does not apply here. When the
cancer cells look like immature/poorly developed white blood cells, the
lymphocytic leukemia is called acute. When the cancer cells are more
developed (look like mature white blood cells), the patient has chronic
leukemia.
The diagnosis is usually fairly obvious but not always: it can depend on the
how far along the disease is; it could be caused by something else, such as
the blood parasite Ehrlichia canis; Addison’s disease; another type of
leukemia; another cancer type, such as lymphoma; a severe, chronic
fungal infection; and more. However, lymphocyte counts over 20,000 are
almost always from a lymphocytic leukemia.
Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) obliterates bone marrow with
immature lymphocytes called lymphoblasts, or simply blasts. The
lymphoblast cell is the hallmark of ALL.
Prognosis is poor for ALL, so it should be distinguished from lymphoma or
more treatable forms of leukemia.
Signs of ALL: listlessness, poor appetite, nausea, diarrhea, and weight
loss. The average age at diagnosis is 6.2 years, with 27% under 4. Over
70% have enlarged spleens, over 50% have enlarged livers, and 40-50%
have enlarged lymph nodes.
Pets with ALL are generally quite sick and require aggressive
chemotherapy and often blood transfusions.
Even with aggressive chemotherapy, only 30% of ALL patients go into
remission, and with no therapy, most patients die within a few weeks.
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is the opposite of ALL, and most
patients have long survival times.
It lasts months to years. The average age at diagnosis is 10-12 years.
In up to 50% of cases there are no symptoms at diagnosis; it is often
discovered on routine blood tests.
In CLL, it is the sheer number of circulating cells rather than what those
cells look like that makes the diagnosis.
Because CLL progresses slowly, treatment is often not given unless one of
several conditions exist, such as especially high lymphocyte counts;
symptoms or organ enlargement; hyperviscosity syndrome; or if other white
blood cell lines are suppressed.
If treatment for CLL is necessary, common protocols involve prednisone,
chlorambucil, vincristine, and/or cyclophosphamide.
There are three forms of CLL: T cell (called T-CLL), B cell (called B-CLL),
and a form with both (called atypical CLL). T-cell and B-cell are the most
common forms. T-CLL has the best prognosis overall, although many
factors can affect a patient’s outcome. The type of CLL can be determined
by blood tests.
Survival times of 1-3 years with good life quality are common.
Boxers tend to get a more aggressive form and have shorter survival times.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 5/6
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952613&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154278
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:34 PM Lymphocytic Leukemia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952613&ind=44&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Additional Resources
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy
Medications for Cats and Dogs
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma in Dogs
Lymphoma Treatment Includes
Nutritional Therapy for Dogs and Cats
Lymphoma
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 16, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Lymphoma, also called lymphosarcoma,
is a highly malignant tumor of the lymph
system.
It is one of the most common forms of
cancer in both humans and small animals.
Presumably you are here because your
pet is suspected of having this form of
cancer. Perhaps the diagnosis has
already been confirmed. In either case,
you want to know more and there turns
out to be much more to know. Because
lymphoma is a common form of cancer in
humans, research and new development in this area abounds. Animal patients as well as
human patients have benefitted from this research.
What is the Lymph System?
The lymph system is a network of lymphatic vessels and lymph nodes through which
foreign proteins and disease organisms are circulated. The lymph nodes serve as
processing centers where these foreign substances may be presented to the cells of the
immune system. There are many different types of immune-related cells; some produce
antibodies, some circulate and destroy the foreign materials they encounter, and some
regulate the activity of other cells.
Lymphocytes are the primary cells of the lymph system and they act in the various ways
mentioned. The lymph vessels serve as a circulatory path for lymphocytes in addition to
serving as a collection system directing foreign substances toward the lymph
nodes. Lymph vessels interface with the blood stream at several areas allowing
lymphocytes greater area to patrol. In many ways, the lymph system is similar to a second
circulatory system in the body, one that circulates lymph fluid instead of blood.
What is Cancer?
Cancer occurs when a normal cell “goes wrong.” The cell’s normal regulatory processes
disengage and it begins to divide quickly and without control. These cells do not stop at
barriers, nor do they stop growing when they outgrow their own blood supply. They divide
over and over, taking over local tissues and escaping to spread to other body areas. The
organ to which the original cell belonged is destroyed as the cancer cells obliterate its
structure. Other local tissues may also become invaded as the tumor cells grow
inexorably into them.
Cancer cells break off the primary tumor and travel via blood or lymph vessels to new
areas of the body. Wherever these cells lodge, they may start new tumors far from the
original tumor but just as deadly. This process continues until there is not enough normal

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951470&ind=45&objTypeID=1007 1/3
tissue left to sustain life. This form of cancer spread is called metastasis.
What is Lymphoma?
When lymphocytes become cancerous within a lymph node, the node swells and hardens.
Malignant lymphocytes readily travel through the lymph vessels to other nearby lymph
nodes. When nearby nodes have been infiltrated, the cancerous lymphocytes continue
their journey through the lymphatic system to distant lymph nodes. Soon all the nodes are
enlarged. Other organs that harbor lymph tissues (liver, spleen and even the GI tract) can
become infiltrated. Ultimately, the bone marrow, where most blood cells are formed, is
affected, the immune system is destroyed, and severe anemia and weakness claim the
victim's life.
Without treatment, animals with lymphoma are expected to live 4-8 weeks from the
time of diagnosis.
Most patients (especially dogs) are not feeling particularly sick at the time of diagnosis. It
may be tempting to hold off on treatment until the pet seems more ill. Waiting can
drastically reduce the chance for long-term survival; better remission quality is obtained if
the patient is treated while he/she still feels healthy.
What is Staging?
Cancer, including lymphoma is staged depending on how many body areas are involved.
The more localized the cancer is, the lower the stage. The more areas are involved, the
higher the stage. The stages of lymphoma are:
Stage I: involvement of a single lymph node
Stage II: involvement of lymph nodes on only one side of the diaphragm (in either only the
front half or only the back half of the body)
Stage III: generalized involvement of peripheral lymph nodes, including both the cranial
(above the waist) and caudal (below the waist) halves of the body
Stage IV: involvement of liver and/or spleen
Stage V: involvement of bone marrow, central nervous system or some other unusual
location.
The good news is that response to treatment in lymphoma is not affected by stage until
the last stage is reached.
Lymphoma staging also involves substaging, which includes determining if the patient is
feeling healthy (substage A) or sick (substage B). Substage A carries a much better
prognosis and response to treatment versus substage B.
Obviously everyone wants to find their pet has potential for a long remission. This will
mostly be determined by the what body part is involved, whether the patient feels sick or
not, whether there are additional secondary problems (such as kidney failure as in renal
lymphoma, or elevated blood calcium levels), and whether prior treatment might have
made the tumor resistant to other treatments.
What is Remission?
Remission is the state where cancer is not detectable in the patient and the patient feels
completely normal. (Note that this state is different from a cure, where the cancer is
considered to be gone forever.) Prolonged remission is the goal of cancer therapy which,
for most lymphoma cases, means chemotherapy. This may sound intimidating but
chemotherapy for pets is not the same experience as it is for humans. For example,
nausea and hair loss are generally uncommon for pets. Keep in mind that humans want a
remission measured in decades if possible and most pets only need several years. This
makes chemotherapy a different experience for pets.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951470&ind=45&objTypeID=1007 2/3
For any patient, there is an approximately 75% chance of achieving remission no
matter which protocol is used.
Because lymphoma cells are quite sensitive to chemotherapy medications, there is an
excellent chance of reducing the tumor to undetectable levels. How long a remission lasts
depends on what protocol is used and a number of other factors. To learn more about
where your pet fits into the statistics, please review the section on lymphoma in your pet's
species. Numerous protocols are available and there is one to potentially fit every budget
and every schedule.
What is the Cure?
Cure is the permanent removal of all traces of tumor such that no further treatment is
needed. In effect, it is a permanent state of remission. While this is technically possible for
your pet, it is more constructive and realistic to focus on increasing life quality. With
lymphoma, remission is likely but cure is not. Treatment may be thought of as an
exchange of only a short time with your pet for a substantially longer time with your pet. It
is important to keep your goals in proper perspective through this treatment: In veterinary
medicine, the goal for lymphoma is a long remission, not a cure.
Related resources
Lymphoma in Cats - August 20, 2024
Lymphoma in Dogs - September 16, 2023
Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - November 22, 2021
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs - January 15, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951470&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154300
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951470&ind=45&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Additional Resources
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy
Medications for Cats and Dogs
Lymphoma
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma Treatment Includes
Nutritional Therapy for Dogs and Cats
The spots indicate the location of
peripheral lymph nodes in dogs.
Illustration courtesy Dr. Wendy
Brooks.
Lymphoma in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 16, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
The typical canine lymphoma patient is a
middle-aged dog brought to the
veterinarian because one or more lumps
have been found. The veterinarian rapidly
determines that these lumps are actually
lymph nodes and that many (if not all) of
the peripheral lymph nodes (those near
the skin surface) are enlarged and firm.
Usually, the dog has not been showing
any signs of illness; he simply has lumps.
The next step is a blood panel and
urinalysis to completely assess the
patient's health, and one or more lymph nodes are aspirated or biopsied to confirm the
diagnosis of lymphoma.
The average life expectancy for a patient with untreated lymphoma is about two months
from the time of diagnosis. If this is your dog's situation, you probably need some time to
absorb the cancer diagnosis. You have many general questions, and you know that a
decision regarding chemotherapy must be made.
How Did My Dog Get Lymphoma?
It is usually unknown how dogs or humans get cancer. There
are many types of cancer and many possible causes of all
those cancers (chemicals in our environment, especially
cigarette smoke, sun exposure, assorted viruses, and
infections). There are important genetic factors as well.
Cancer starts with one or a small group of cells that have
gone wrong. Bodies have an assortment of natural
mechanisms to destroy these cells before they get out of
hand. When these abnormal cells escape natural
mechanisms, cancer develops.
It is important to realize that cancer is not contagious and that, as a pet owner, you should
not feel that you somehow caused this or brought it on your pet. Many people feel a need
to find blame and latch onto the idea that a household cleaner or pesticide was the cause.
This is a natural part of grieving but it is important not to focus on cause unduly. The
cause is not relevant to treatment; furthermore, there is no way to verify the cause. At this
time, there is no way to know what caused lymphoma development in a given patient.
Genetically predisposed breeds include the Basset hound, boxer, Golden retriever, and St.
Bernard. It is best to concentrate on treatment.
Can My Dog Be Cured?

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Theoretically, yes, but practically speaking, no. It is best to focus on a realistic outcome
that is the longest possible survival with a good quality of life. Different treatment protocols
are associated with different disease-free intervals, meaning that the length of time your
dog feels normal will vary depending on the protocol you choose. The disease-free
interval also depends on patient factors (type of lymphoma, concurrent disease, prior
treatment, etc.). Obviously, the goal is to have as long a disease-free interval as possible.
Does My Pet Need Further Tests?
The answer is most likely yes because there is a great deal more to know before
treatment options can be determined. We need to know about the patient's general health
and whether there are any medications that should not be considered. Testing will help
determine what type of lymphocytes are involved and how far the cancer has spread.
Basic blood work and a urinalysis will be needed to assess the patient's ability to take the
medications needed. Obviously, liver and kidney function will be relevant, but the blood
calcium level is particularly worthy of scrutiny. Some types of lymphoma produce a
hormone called PTH-rp (parathyroid hormone-related protein) that is capable of creating
dangerous elevations in the blood calcium level (see hypercalcemia for more details.) A
dog with an elevated blood calcium level tends to have a poorer prognosis. Approximately
15 percent of dogs with lymphoma (and 40 percent of dogs with T-cell lymphoma) have
elevated blood calcium levels, so screening is important from the beginning.
If a biopsy has not been performed, it may be a good idea to do one so as to get the
maximum information about the tumor (whether it is slow or fast growing, what type of
lymphocytes are involved, etc.) as this information can help predict the response to
chemotherapy. Special staining of the sample, or even a test such as flow cytometry, is
needed to distinguish the type of lymphocyte involved in the tumor. T-cell lymphoma, for
example, is less responsive to medication than B-cell lymphoma. Luckily, B-cell lymphoma
accounts for 75 percent of canine lymphoma.
Other tests that may be recommended include a bone marrow aspirate, ultrasound of the
abdomen, and/or a spleen or liver aspirate. These tests are needed to stage the disease,
which basically means determining how widespread the cancer is in the body. Lymphoma is
classified by stage:
Stage I: only one lymph node is involved
Stage II: several lymph nodes in the same general area involved
Stage III: all peripheral lymph nodes involved
Stage IV: all peripheral lymph nodes plus the spleen, liver, and/or anterior mediastinum in
the chest involved
Stage V: bone marrow involvement, regardless of any other areas involved
Staging has less impact on therapy choices than one might think but it is true that patients
in Stage V, the most advanced stage, have a poorer prognosis than those in the other
stages.
How Does Lymphoma Cause Death?
Lymphoma is a rapidly growing malignancy that is able to arise and/or travel anywhere
where there is lymph tissue. Of course, there is lymph tissue in virtually every organ in the
body. Eventually, the cancer will infiltrate an organ to such an extent that that organ fails
(often, this is the bone marrow or the liver). The patient loses appetite, vomits or gets
diarrhea, weakens, and dies. At some point, the tumor becomes resistant to therapy, and
no further remissions can be obtained.
What Are Other Forms of Lymphoma?
Lymphoma is classified by the anatomic area affected. By far, the most common form in
dogs is the multicentric form, which accounts for 84 percent of canine lymphoma. In this
form, as in the hypothetical case we opened with, all peripheral lymph nodes are large

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 2/6
and firm. There are three other forms of lymphoma:
Gastrointestinal form (affecting only the GI tract) accounts for five to seven
percent of canine lymphoma
Mediastinal (chest)
Extranodal (skin, eye, and other miscellaneous areas).
Lymphoma can occur anywhere in the body where there is lymph tissue. At this time, we
will concentrate on multicentric lymphoma. Eventually further information on these rarer
forms will be added.
Chemotherapy FAQ
The word chemotherapy conjures images of people losing their hair and suffering chronic
nausea. It is unfortunate that many pets do not receive chemotherapy based upon these
unpleasant images that do not truly represent the current state of treatment response in
pets. Chemotherapy simply means therapy using medication (as opposed to using
surgery or radiation). Decades of research have gone into patient comfort, minimizing side
effects, and maximizing response, so it is important to keep an open mind. The following
are questions pet owners commonly have regarding chemotherapy for their dogs.
The median survival time for most dogs on chemotherapy is approximately one year, with
25 percent of dogs surviving two years.
My dog is not acting sick in any way. Shouldn't I wait until she at least feels sick before
beginning chemotherapy?
This might seem like a reasonable approach at first glance, but let us assure you that it is
not. One of the most important factors in determining the quality of remission (i.e., how
fast we get remission and how long it lasts) is whether or not the patient is feeling sick at
the time chemotherapy is started. When lymphoma patients are staged (see above under
"Does my pet need further tests?"), stages are subcategorized as a or b, depending on
whether or not the patient is feeling ill or not. For example, a multicentric lymphoma dog
that feels well is in stage IIIa compared to one that is vomiting or not eating and is in stage
IIIb. You will have a much better chance for long-term quality survival if lymphoma is
treated while the patient is an a.
Are there other factors that might suggest a better or worse response to treatment?
The goal is to achieve remission quickly and for the longest possible time. Factors that
contribute to an individual dog's ability to do this include:
Whether he is feeling sick at the time treatment is started. (Dogs that do not
feel ill do best).
Whether there is hypercalcemia (elevated blood calcium) on the blood panel.
(Dogs with hypercalcemia do worse).
Prior exposure (within the last week or so) to corticosteroid medications.
(Steroids make the tumor resistant to chemotherapy - see below).
Whether the lymphocytes involved are B-cells or T-cells. (T-cell lymphoma is
more difficult to treat than B-cell lymphoma.)
Whether there is intestinal involvement. (Intestinal lymphoma is very bad news
for a dog.)
Having Stage V lymphoma. (Most stages carry similar prognoses but Stage V is
extra bad.)
Indolent forms of lymphoma, small cell lymphoma, and low-grade lymphoma
progress very slowly but are more resistant to chemotherapy.
Should we see an oncologist?
Not all veterinarians are comfortable treating lymphoma. Discuss with your veterinarian
whether a referral to a specialist would be best for you and your pet.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Will chemotherapy make my dog sick?
Probably not. Nausea or infection are possibilities, but most dogs do not experience any
such complications or they are readily controlled with medications. While approximately
25% will experience some kind of side effect, only 7% of patients experience side effects
serious enough to require hospitalization. Human chemotherapy is generally much more
aggressive, largely because survival goals are much longer, and as a result there is a
larger side effect situation. In pets, goals are different — a year of remission versus a
decade of remission for people — and protocols are less aggressive. The bottom line is
that most pets on chemotherapy do not have significant side effect issues but if they do
occur, they are usually manageable.
Will chemotherapy make my dog lose his hair or go bald?
While whiskers are commonly lost, substantial hair loss is not experienced by most dogs
or cats on chemotherapy. There are some notable exceptions in those breeds that have
synchronous hair follicle activity. Most breeds have hairs in all different stages of the
growth-shed cycle at the same time. A few breeds have all hairs in the same stage at the
same time. The breeds, including some of their mixed breeds that have a baldness issue
include Old English Sheepdog, poodle, Lhasa Apso, and Shih Tzu.
How will I know when we have achieved remission?
A patient in remission is indistinguishable from a completely cancer-free patient. The
lymph nodes will go down to normal size and if there were any signs of illness related to
the cancer, these should resolve. The chance of achieving remission is pretty good with
most protocols: 50-80% depending on the protocol selected. The real differences in
protocols concern how long the remission is likely to last. Obviously there are patient
factors in play that influence this; see above.
How will I know when we have lost remission?
The most obvious sign will be that the lymph node enlargement has returned. This means
that the cancer is now resistant to the drugs being used and new drugs must be chosen.
(Seeking a second remission after the first remission has been lost is called a rescue.)
How long will my dog have quality life on chemotherapy?
This depends on what protocol you choose, and there are many. There are also many
factors that influence how an individual will do relative to the average response. Important
parameters to note when reviewing a protocol are:
1. the disease-free interval (i.e., how long the patient is free from illness)
2. survival time
3. typical duration of remission
4. expense
5. scheduling.
Commonly employed protocols are CHOP, single agent doxorubicin, doxorubicin and
prednisolone, Tanovea® and doxorubicin and prednisolone monotherapy. See the links
for more information on each drug and its associated side effects and issues. New
protocols and new medications are constantly being developed and specialists have the
most up to date information.
What is CHOP Therapy?
CHOP is an acronym for cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin HCI (hydroxydaunrubicin),
vincristine (brand name Oncovin) and prednisolone/prednisone. The
prednisolone/prednisone is typically given daily at home as a tablet while weekly
injections/oral treatments are done in the hospital. There are several variations of this
regimen but this multidrug format is probably the most common protocol employed
regardless of the type of lymphoma. For B-cell lymphomas, 80-90 percent can be
expected to achieve remission within the first month. The median survival time is 12
months with 25 percent of patients still alive at two years. Whether the protocol can be

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 4/6
curtailed after a certain time or if it should be continued indefinitely is a subject of debate.
For T-cell lymphoma, approximately 70 percent will achieve remission with a six to eight
month median survival time. CHOP protocols involve drugs that have specific handling
requirements and are generally performed with an oncology specialist.
What is Tanovea®?
Tanovea-CA1 is the brand name of a product called rabacfosadine. It is given as an IV
infusion every 3 weeks for up to five treatments. It is one of the newest treatments in use
for lymphoma. When it is combined with doxorubicin, 68% of dogs achieved remission
with a median duration of 194 days while 16% achieved a partial remission. Tanovea-CA1
can be used alone but seems to work better with other medications. The main side effect
of concern is pulmonary fibrosis (lung scarring), which is fatal in 5% of patients. West
Highland White terriers are predisposed to pulmonary fibrosis and many experts feel this
drug should not be used in this breed and should be used with warnings and extra
monitoring in any terrier.
What if there are No Specialists or there are Financial Limitations?
If there are no oncology specialists in your area, it may be possible for your regular
veterinarian to consult with a specialist to put together an appropriate protocol. There are
also services where your veterinarian can not only consult with an oncologist but can also
obtain needed medications. If a low-income solution is needed, it may be worth
considering prednisolone/prednisone monotherapy, which is a fancy term for
giving prednisolone/prednisone alone with no other chemotherapy agents.
As chemotherapy goes, prednisolone/prednisone is quite benign and many, if not most,
dogs have been on it one time or another for itchy skin. prednisolone/prednisone kills
lymphocytes, including malignant ones. As with other protocols, remission is frequently
obtained within the first month but the remission is likely to be short (one to two months)
unless other medications are added in. Furthermore, the use of prednisolone/prednisone
makes the tumor resistant to other agents of chemotherapy so that it will be especially
difficult to get a second remission after the first remission is lost.
The bottom line is that a remission will likely be possible at a low cost without seeing a
specialist, but it will likely be a short one. This option is for patients for whom the other
protocols are unavailable.
It should also be mentioned that funded research studies are periodically available. These
are clinical trials examining an experimental protocol without cost to the pet owner after it
has been determined that a patient is a candidate.
Related resources
Lymphoma in Cats - August 20, 2024
Lymphoma - September 16, 2023
Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - November 22, 2021
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs - January 15, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951455&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154328
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 5/6
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951455&ind=46&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Epitheliotropic lymphoma affects both back feet of this
boxer. Photo Courtesy of Dr. Jeff Chemelewski
Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 17, 2025
Published: February 15, 2019
(also known as cutaneous T cell lymphoma
and cutaneous epitheliotropic lymphoma)
Lymphoma can arise in any organ that
contains lymph tissue (which turns out to
be just about anywhere in the body). While
lymphoma generally occurs in lymph nodes
and organs with substantial lymphatic
system presence, occasionally, lymphoma
arises in the skin. Skin forms of lymphoma
are often itchy and rashy and thus are
readily mistaken for allergic
dermatitis. Further compounding the
difficulty in making the correct diagnosis is
the fact that superficial skin infections are
common not only in allergy situations but in
many skin diseases, including skin
lymphoma, so partial responses to antibiotics may be misleading. Lymphoma in the skin
would be a rare cause of dermatitis, but there comes a point where a biopsy is needed to
explain a poor response to the usual therapies. A biopsy is needed to capture the
diagnosis of lymphoma.
Three Types
There are three types: mycosis fungoides, Sézary syndrome, and pagetoid reticulosis.
Mycosis Fungoides
The name "mycosis fungoides" suggests a benign fungal infection, but nothing could be
farther from the truth. Mycosis fungoides is a very malignant form of skin lymphoma; it is
named for fungus because the tumors are said to resemble mushrooms.
An oral form also exists where the gums become inflamed and ulcerated. This could also
be mistaken for any number of oral diseases, and again, a biopsy is needed to find the
truth. As mentioned, it can look like a skin infection with nodules and frequently goes
unrecognized until it fails to respond to the usual skin-oriented antibiotics and is biopsied.
Sézary Syndrome (A Rare Complication)
Mycosis fungoides can progress to what is called Sézary syndrome. Here, skin cancer
advances into the bloodstream to create leukemia. The cancer cells in the blood are not
like other leukemia cells and are called Sézary cells. This complication almost never
happens in dogs but happens in approximately 5 percent of humans with mycosis
fungoides, so the term may come up if you do any internet research.
Pagetoid Reticulosis

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=8955916&ind=47&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Epitheliotropic lymphoma in a French bulldog. Photo Courtesy of Dr.
Neal Saslow.
The only difference between pagetoid reticulosis and mycosis fungoides is seen on
biopsy. Pagetoid reticulosis is a more superficial form of skin lymphoma that does not
penetrate to deeper skin structures. It can be localized to one area of the skin or to larger
areas of the skin.
Prognosis
Most pets succumb to euthanasia when there are too many ulcerated growths, too much
intractable itching, or the infections cannot be controlled. Variable survival times have
been reported in different studies, but the prognosis is generally regarded as poor, while a
good goal is six months for dogs and perhaps 10 months for cats. (This contrasts with the
human form of the disease, which is much more readily controlled with chemotherapy.)
For many patients, the goal of chemotherapy is not to achieve a longer survival but to
improve life quality during a relatively short survival. Most studies report median survival
times of 6-7 months.
Treatments
Since most tumors arise in groups
or involve large areas, surgery or
radiotherapy will not be
effective. Chemotherapy will be
needed to reach all the tumors. This
might be provided by a single
medication like lomustine but could
just as likely include a multi-drug
combination protocol involving such
medications as L-asparaginase,
prednisolone, cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, and/or doxorubicin.
Aside from chemotherapy regimens,
a few less conventional methods
have emerged.
Retinoids
Skin lymphoma cells appear to have receptors for synthetic vitamin A derivatives. Median
survival times have been increased with retinoids. This all sounds good, but the type of
retinoids used to treat such skin diseases also cause human birth defects, and because of
this, their access is highly regulated, and they are very difficult to obtain in the U.S.
Safflower Oil
The Hollywood brand of safflower oil (apparently, the Hain brand does not work) was
given to six out of eight dogs who had lost remission from conventional treatment and
were able to achieve remission with no other therapy. It should be noted that this was a
very small study (only eight dogs), and GI upset can result from the twice-weekly oil doses
needed for this therapy.
Rabacfosadine
This is a new medication recently approved for lymphoma treatment in dogs. When
combined with prednisolone, 45 percent of dogs with this condition achieved at least
partial remission.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8955916&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154353

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=8955916&ind=47&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:35 PM Lymphoma in the Skin of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=8955916&ind=47&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Additional Resources
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy
Medications for Cats and Dogs
Lymphoma
Lymphoma in Cats
Lymphoma in Dogs
Photo Courtesy Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for
Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 22, 2021
Published: July 11, 2004
After a diagnosis of cancer has been
confirmed, many pet owners seek
nutritional advice in an effort to address
the disease from another angle. The fact
is that no supplement or dietary approach
is going to kill tumor cells directly; there is
no secret super nutrient with cancer-killing
properties. Instead, the goals of nutrition
for the cancer patient focus on preserving
body condition: maintaining a good
appetite, maintaining a healthy body
weight and maintaining muscle mass.
Beyond this, people wonder if there is a
nutritional strategy that might put a tumor
at a disadvantage: Not a cancer-killing
super-nutrient per se but more of a general
program that might create an edge over a
regular commercial pet food. Several
theories have emerged on how this might
be done but, unfortunately, a lot of
scientific evidence has not followed. Here
are commonly employed strategies:
Low carbohydrate diets
Raw food
Home cooking
High Levels of Omega 3 Fatty
acids.
Let's look at these more closely.
Low Carb Diet
Cancers tend to use anaerobic metabolism, in part because they do not have normal
structure or blood vessel support, and inadequate blood to a tissue means inadequate
oxygen, and inadequate oxygen means anaerobic metabolism. Anaerobic metabolism
burns carbohydrates rather than fats. There are actually more complex reasons for tumors
to go anaerobic beyond not having a proper blood supply but the fact is that tumors tend
to want to burn carbohydrates while healthy tissues want to burn fats. The theory of the
low-carb diet is that fewer carbohydrates coming in means less food for the tumor.

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952076&ind=48&objTypeID=1007 1/4
A raw food meal. Photo by Mary Buck.
This theory is of some controversy but if you wish to feed such a diet, it is important to
seek a food with less than 20 percent carbohydrates. Be aware that grain-free diets are
usually not low in carbohydrates. Grain-free diets cater to the idea that some animals are
not tolerant of grain proteins so these foods employ potatoes, yams or similar vegetables
as carbohydrate sources. Recently grain-free diets have been implicated in heart disease
so it is best not to feed them unless there is a reason to do so, such as food allergy.
Raw Foods
Raw foods have some advantages over
cooked foods. They are frequently more
palatable than cooked foods. Because they
are uncooked, their proteins are unaltered
by the cooking process and may be less
allergenic. There is some argument that
raw foods are more digestible than cooked
foods because they more closely match
the diet that an animal evolved to digest.
On the flip side of this is bacterial
contamination, a very real concern and a
special risk for a cancer patient whose
immune system is probably altered. There
have been numerous studies showing
pathogenic bacteria in raw foods (both
home prepared and commercially obtained). The last thing a cancer patient needs is a
bacterial intestinal infection, so most experts recommend against raw foods especially for
patients who have cancer.
Home Cooking
Home cooking can provide a highly palatable food for a patient with a sensitive appetite.
The problem is that there is an abundance of recipes that turn out to be nutritionally
incomplete when compared to the National Research Council (NRC) minimum
requirements. Obviously, the cancer patient needs at least the same nutrition as a healthy
patient.
Pet nutrition, especially when disease is involved, is not a do-it-yourself project where one
assembles ingredients that seem whole and healthy and attempts to complete the diet
with a multivitamin. If you are going to cook food for a pet, it is vital to have professional
guidance beyond a web site that looks knowledgeable or a book that seems scholarly. A
professional nutritionist should be consulted and this means a veterinarian who is a
diplomate of the American College of Veterinary Nutrition.
Some helpful resources include ACVN.org and BalanceIt.com
It is not clear if anything more can be achieved with a home cooked diet as opposed to a
commercially prepared one but many people feel more comfortable making foods free of
artificial preservatives or flavor enhancers. The main goal is to provide a palatable but still
nutritionally complete food for the patient.
Omega 3 Fatty Acids
What is a fatty acid? Biochemically, a fatty acid is what we colloquially call plain old fat. A
fatty acid consists of a long carbon chain (say 20 or so carbons in length) with a
biochemical acid group at one end. But there are different kinds of fat. Some fats are
stored and burned as fuels and some fats form the structure of our cell membranes. It is
these fatty acids that are recruited in the inflammatory cascade to be converted into
prostaglandins and other inflammatory mediators. Omega 3 fatty acids are similarly

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952076&ind=48&objTypeID=1007 2/4
recruited but do not convert to inflammatory mediators. Examples of omega three fatty
acids, also called n-3 fatty acids, include alpha linolenic acid (ALA); Eicosopentanoic acid
(EPA); and docosahexanoic acid (DHA).
Saturated Vs. Unsaturated
Saturated Fat
There is more evidence for omega 3 fatty acid having anti-cancer properties at high
doses. The best source of DHA and EPA is cold water fish oils. Flax seed oil is a good
source of ALA and is preferred by many people who want the benefits of an omega 3 fatty
acid without the fishy taste. ALA, unfortunately, is not a very useful omega 3 fatty acids for
dogs and cats so DHA and EPA are needed. Luckily, most pets like the fishy smell and
taste.
Examples of omega three fatty acids (also called n-3 fatty acids): Alpha linolenic acid,
Eicosapentaenoic acid, docosahexanoic acid.
An excellent source is cold water fish oils.
Omega-3 fatty acids have been shown to inhibit the growth and spread of cancer, plus
they have anti-inflammatory properties. In the study that launched Hill's n/d, a food for
cancer patients, 32 dogs with lymphoma were divided randomly into two groups: one that
received a diet heavy in menhaden fish oil and one that received a diet heavy in soy bean
oil. Both groups also received chemotherapy with doxorubicin. The dogs that received this
omega 3 fatty acid diet went into remission sooner and stayed in remission longer than
dogs that received the soy bean oil diet.
Both the low carb and omega three fatty acid therapies are incorporated into some
therapeutic diets available only at your clinic, which are canned food and for dogs only.
Should my Dog Use this Diet?
The Hill's n/d may be of tremendous benefit to a dog with lymphoma but there are a few
caveats:
This diet is frequently found unpalatable by dogs and the high fat levels tend to
produce diarrhea. Remember that enjoyment of food is an important life quality
parameter. If a dog eats n/d diet poorly and loses body condition due to poor
appetite, it is probably best to use a different diet that is more palatable.
Despite studies by Hills when the diet was first introduced, most oncologists
have felt more proof of effect is needed before including it in standard therapy
for lymphoma.
Hollywood Brand Safflower Oil and Mycosis Fungoides
There is a particularly difficult form of T-cell lymphoma called Mycosis fungoides. This type
of lymphoma is limited to the skin and, like most T-cell forms of lymphoma, it is resistant to
the usual lymphoma treatments. It seems there is some basis for using one of the omega
6 fatty acids: linoleum acid.
There are two major brands of safflower oil on the market: Hain and Hollywood.
Apparently Hollywood is the brand with the most linoleic acid and is the brand of choice in
this somewhat controversial treatment. In one study using eight dogs with Mycosis

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952076&ind=48&objTypeID=1007 3/4
fungoides (the skin T-cell form of lymphoma), six dogs achieved remission with no other
therapy.
Minimal adverse effects come with the use of this oil (if too much oil is used there is a
possibility of pancreatitis but, in general, obesity from the fat is the only problem).
Safflower oil is inexpensive and readily available.
References
Effect of fish oil, arginine, and doxorubicin chemotherapy on remission and survival time
for dogs with lymphoma: a double-blind, randomized placebo-controlled study.
Cancer 88[8]:1916-28 2000 Apr 15
Ogilvie GK, Fettman MJ, Mallinckrodt CH, Walton JA, Hansen RA, Davenport DJ, Gross
KL, Richardson KL, Rogers Q, Hand MS
Cancer Lett 1992 May 30;64(1):17-22
Linoleate produces remission in canine mycosis fungoides.
Iwamoto KS, Bennett LR, Norman A, Villalobos AE, Hutson CA
Department of Radiological Sciences, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.
The Use of Safflower Oil for the Treatment of Mycosis Fungoides in Two Dogs.
Peterson, A., Wood, S., and Rosser, E. Dept of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, D208
Veterinary Medical Center, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.
Related resources
Lymphoma in Cats - August 20, 2024
Lymphoma in Dogs - September 16, 2023
Lymphoma - September 16, 2023
Common Lymphoma Chemotherapy Medications for Cats and Dogs - January 15, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952076&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154378
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Lymphoma Treatment Includes Nutritional Therapy for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952076&ind=48&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Oral Melanoma
Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 07, 2024
Published: March 31, 2009
Most people have heard of malignant melanoma and know it is a serious skin cancer. The
cells involved are the melanocytes, the skin cells that produce the pigment known as
melanin. In humans, malignant melanoma is associated with sun exposure and sunburn
damage and is an important reason to have your skin surface regularly scanned for
pigmented growths. The situation in pets similarly involves serious cancer of the
melanocytes and often pigmented growths, but in pets, specific body parts are classically
involved. While any pigmented growth should be reported to the veterinarian, there are
specific areas on the body to be particularly concerned about, and sun exposure is not as
important.
Benign Vs. Malignant Melanomas/Haired Skin Melanomas
It turns out that the behavior of melanoma is highly dependent on the region of the body
where it develops. Most areas of the skin grow benign versions of melanoma that are
called melanocytes. This means that pigmented growth found on haired skin in an area
that is not considered a danger zone is likely to behave benignly. That said, they do not all
behave benignly; it is important to have all tumors analyzed by a pathologist so that a
given tumor's behavior can be predicted. What ancillary treatment or testing is
recommended (if any) will be determined based on this tissue analysis.
Many melanomas removed from haired skin show cells that look malignant under the
microscope but do not behave in a malignant manner. To get a better sense of how a
given tumor will behave, the number of cells in the process of division is counted in the
sample. This is reflected by a number called the mitotic index of the tumor and is
expressed as the number of mitotic figures (cells in the process of dividing) per high
power field (microscopic view). Less than 3 mitotic figures per high power field indicate the
tumor will most likely behave in a benign manner. There is evidence that staining the
sample for certain tissue markers (such as Ki-67) can help predict behavior as well.
There is some suspicion that haired skin melanomas developing within 1 cm of a mucosal
margin (like the mouth or genital area) behave more malignantly than one would expect
based on what is seen under the microscope. Always have growths biopsied after removal
and do not be shy about consulting an oncology specialist if there is any question.
Let us return to the concept of danger zones. There are several areas that grow
particularly invasive melanomas, which are not only locally destructive but spread cancer
to the lungs, liver, and other areas. The areas where melanoma development is
particularly threatening include:
The mouth, lips, and
oral cavity
The toe or foot
The eye.

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952854&ind=49&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Photo courtesy MarVistaVet
Oral Melanoma
In memory of Scooter. Photo courtesy Shirley Koehler.
Each of these areas produces
a somewhat different
syndrome, and we will review
each separately.
Melanoma of the Mouth
Oral melanoma is a highly
malignant tumor. It is locally
destructive in the mouth, plus it
readily and quickly spreads to
other areas of the body. This
means that there are three
aspects of the cancer requiring
attention: the local destruction
in the oral cavity, undetectable
tumor cells in the process of
spreading, and the cancer that
is detectable in distant organs.
Once a melanoma is confirmed by biopsy, a staging process must begin to determine the
extent of tumor spread. Chest radiographs are scrutinized for evidence of spread, local
lymph nodes are sampled, and the abdomen is screened with an ultrasound exam.
In the mouth,
the size of
the tumor is
extremely
important
when
considering
the
prognosis.
Veterinary
medicine
has adopted
the World
Health
Organization
staging
system,
where Stage
I disease is a
tumor less
than 2 cm
(just less
than 1 inch)
in diameter; Stage II disease is a tumor 2 – 4 cm in diameter; and Stage III disease
consists of tumors 4 cm or larger or any tumor with local lymph node involvement. Stage
IV disease includes any tumor with evidence of distant spread. Median survival times for
oral melanoma have been reported as:
Stage I: approximately 17-18 months (with surgery alone)
Stage II: approximately six months (with surgery alone)
Stage III: approximately three months (with surgery alone)
Stage IV: approximately one month (surgery not applicable)

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952854&ind=49&objTypeID=1007 2/5
The goal of additional adjunctive therapy (radiation, chemotherapy, immunotherapy) is to
extend this time.
Local Disease Control
Local disease control refers to the control of the disease in the mouth. Ideally, most of the
tumor can be surgically removed; however, even an extensive resection is not likely to
remove the entire tumor with certainty, and some kind of adjunctive treatment is prudent.
Radiation in the area has extended the time until the tumor regrows in areas where
complete margins cannot be obtained (i.e., biopsy shows there is still more tumor left). If
margins are clean, immunotherapy (see later) may be all that is recommended.
Distant Disease Control
If there is documentation that the tumor has escaped and colonized another site in the
body (i.e., the patient is in Stage IV), more extensive treatment is needed, and this usually
means chemotherapy. Melanoma is notoriously not responsive to chemotherapy in
people, but research and new drug development continue. In one study carboplatin
combined with piroxicam increased median survival time from 30 days to 119 days in
Stage IV patients.
Microscopic Disease
After no disease is detectable to the eye, no guarantees can be made about the
undetectable disease, which is malignant cells in transit looking for a place to set up shop.
Chemotherapy helps reach these cells, as does immunotherapy, a newer mode of cancer
treatment. Immunotherapy involves generating an immune response against the tumor
cells and attacking them with the body's own natural system. Periodic screening
tests/staging are needed to see if the tumor has succeeded in settling in a distant organ,
and therapy can be ramped up to address this event.
Melanoma in the Digit (Toe)
Developing melanoma in the toe or toenail bed seems to be a particular problem for black
dogs, though dogs of any color have the potential to develop it.
The tumor is particularly destructive to the bone and quite painful, starting usually as a
swelling that seems associated with an infected toenail. The toe infection may improve
with treatment, but the swelling does not resolve and ultimately gets worse. If the tumor
has not spread beyond the toe, amputation should theoretically be curative, but the reality
is that the median survival time after toe amputation in cases where the further tumor is
not detectable is approximately one year. It is believed that 30-40 percent of these tumors
have already spread at the time of diagnosis, so if a longer survival is the goal, further
treatment should be explored.
The pigments of the iris and ciliary body within the eye are especially vulnerable to
melanoma development. These tumors are particular; further treatment should be
explored.
Because this is such an aggressive tumor, staging is important after melanoma is
confirmed. This means chest radiographs, lymph node sampling, and ultrasound of the
abdominal organs to identify distant spread. As before, local disease, distant disease, and
microscopic disease must be addressed.
Melanoma of the Eye is particularly difficult to see until they are fairly large. The clinical
situation is different depending on whether the patient is a cat or a dog.
Uveal/Iris Melanoma - Dogs
The good news is that this is a benign condition in at least 80 percent of patients. The bad
news is that an expanding growth inside the eye, even a benign growth, can cause pain
and blindness. If glaucoma (increased eye pressure) has resulted or if there is deep

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952854&ind=49&objTypeID=1007 3/5
inflammation in the eye, rapid tumor growth, or vision loss, it is probably worth simply
removing the eye (enucleation), though smaller growths might be amenable to laser
therapy.
Uveal/Iris Melanoma - Cats
The feline situation is different in that 60-70 percent of these tumors are malignant and will
spread. Tumors can be large and bulgy, as in the dog's eye or they can be more subtle,
starting as flat areas of pigment on the iris (colored part of the eye) and later gaining some
3-dimensional growth. The eye will likely need removal to manage the pain from the
expanding growth, but it is important to do proper staging first (radiographs of the chest,
local lymph node sampling, ultrasound of the abdominal organs) to determine the extent
of the existing tumor spread.
Iris melanosis, which is a benign condition, can be impossible to distinguish from an early
melanoma, so often, periodic evaluation by a specialist is in order. Iris melanosis refers to
the "freckles" and flat dark spots that older cats develop on their irises. These spots are
common but should not have any bulging or changing roughness when the iris is viewed
from the side.
Epibulbar Melanoma
This form of melanoma is usually benign in either dogs or cats and arises on the outer eye
portion where the sclera (white part) meets the cornea (clear part over the iris). Smaller
growths may not need treatment. Larger ones can be surgically removed, treated with
laser, or with cryosurgery. Tumor spread is not expected with this form of melanoma.
Treatment
As mentioned, treatment is divided into local disease control, distant disease control, and
microscopic disease control. Surgery and radiotherapy are the fundamental treatments for
local disease, whereas chemotherapy is the foundation of distant disease control.
Different medications and protocols are being developed all the time. Immunotherapy is a
little harder to classify.
The Melanoma Vaccine
A melanoma vaccine has been in use for nearly a decade now, not to prevent melanoma
development but to generate an active immune response against an existing tumor. The
vaccine was tested on dogs with Stage II and Stage III oral melanoma after all detectable
tumor was surgically removed, with improved survival times achieved over what was
expected from surgery alone. The vaccine has also been found helpful for toe/digit
melanomas as well.
The vaccine is for dogs without grossly detectable tumors; it will probably not be helpful
for dogs where there is already a distant tumor spread.
How it Works
An enzyme called tyrosinase is crucial to the melanocyte’s ability to produce melanin
(pigment). By using human tyrosinase as a stimulator, the patient’s immune system can
be tricked into attacking the melanoma cells that contain the patient’s natural tyrosinase.
The vaccine is available only through veterinary oncology specialists. It is given in four
single doses at two-week intervals. Booster shots are given every six months and are best
used for dogs with oral melanoma without node involvement. Life expectancy has been
extended to over one year in many cases.
Learn more information on the new melanoma vaccine and about canine melanoma in
general.
Not all veterinarians are comfortable treating malignant melanomas; discuss with your
veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would be best for you and your pet.

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952854&ind=49&objTypeID=1007 4/5
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952854&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154400
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:36 PM Malignant Melanoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952854&ind=49&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Original illustration by MarVistaVet
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 18, 2023
Published: October 28, 2007
Meet the Thyroid Glands
The two thyroid glands are located in the throat,
nestled just behind the larynx on either side of the
windpipe. These glands are responsible for making
and storing thyroid hormones, in particular thyroxine
which is also called T4. This hormone is released
and then activated by the body’s tissues into
triiodothyronine or T3. Triiodothyronine (T3) acts as a
sort of volume dial for metabolism, controlling how
fast our cells burn fuel, while thyroxine (T4) is an
inactive form. There is actually quite a long story
involving how these hormones work, and how an
assortment of inactive forms are made and shifted
back to activity again, but that story is for another
time. Today’s story is not about healthy thyroids and
their activity but about thyroid malignancy. The
situation is a little different between dogs and cats so
we’ll discuss them separately.
Canine
Thyroid tumor in dogs generally does not affect the production of thyroid hormones. This
means there is nothing to detect on a screening lab report that would indicate a tumor; a
dog with a thyroid tumor is usually neither hypothyroid nor hyperthyroid. The tumor is
usually detected when someone, usually either the owner at home or the veterinarian
during the examination, notices a lump around the dog’s throat. The lump may deeply
adhere, potentially altering the dog’s voice or ability to swallow, or the lump may be fairly
moveable. The average age at tumor detection is nine years, and there is no gender
predilection. Some studies have suggested that the following breeds are predisposed to
developing thyroid carcinoma: Boxer, Beagle, and Golden Retriever.
In canine thyroid carcinomas, approximately one dog in five will be hyperthyroid.
So what happens after a lump is detected?
The goal at this point is to assess the dog for general health and for potential tumor
spread as well as to identify the lump. The initial assessment of a dog with a throat lump
should include a physical examination, a basic database of blood and urine testing
including a T4 level, and a set of chest radiographs (x-rays) to check for obvious tumor
spread. After these basic tests are completed, some special tests are needed to identify
the lump/growth.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952703&ind=50&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Canine thyroid carcinoma imaged by scintigraphy. The
dog's nose is pointing upward. The two red spots are the
salivary glands (which take up i-131) and the large red
spot is the tumor. The image shows the dog's head and
neck. Image provided by Michael R. Broome, DVM, MS,
Dipl. ABVP and AVMI
There are several procedures that could be
performed to identify the growth. If the
growth is loose and fairly moveable in an
accessible area, the easiest procedure may
be to simply remove and biopsy it. This
provides the most accurate means of
identifying the growth and may even prove
curative. The problem is that often thyroid
carcinoma is extremely vascular and deeply
adhered to the deeper structures of the
throat, which means that surgery may not be
so simple.
A less invasive option is a fine needle
aspirate. Here, a needle is inserted into the
growth, and cells are withdrawn with a
syringe. A sample is submitted to the lab for
analysis. This is not nearly as accurate as a
biopsy when it comes to distinguishing
benign from malignant thyroid disease but
greater than 90% of the time this procedure
will at least identify the growth as thyroid in
origin. Since statistics indicate a thyroid
growth is malignant 87% of the time, this
goes a long way to identify it as a thyroid carcinoma. Cytology only detects malignancy
directly in about 50 percent of the samples where the tumor later proved to be malignant;
in most cases, we can infer malignancy simply by knowing that the cytology confirmed
thyroid cells.
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant.
How do we treat thyroid carcinomas?
Treatment depends on several factors: how deeply invasive the tumor is and whether
there is already measurable tumor spread. Three imaging techniques can be used, and
which are sometimes combined, to answer these questions: ultrasound, scintigraphy
(nuclear medicine), and MRI.
Ultrasound uses sound waves to image the deeper structures of the throat and determine
the feasibility of removing the primary tumor. This method is non-invasive, and many
hospitals have the necessary equipment available. If surgery is being considered,
ultrasound might be an especially helpful choice as it will indicate whether surgical
resection is even possible.
Scintigraphy is especially helpful in detecting tumor spread. Here, a radioactive material
called pertechnetate is given intravenously. It follows a similar course as iodine would,
iodine being an important component of thyroid hormone. This means that the nuclear
medicine image can reveal areas of thyroid tissue in all sorts of inappropriate areas
indicating the extent of tumor spread. Scans are reasonably priced but not necessarily
available in all areas; one has to be lucky enough to live near a nuclear medicine facility.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is another way of detecting the depth of a tumor and
possibly tumor spread. A highly detailed image is produced, but imaging requires general
anesthesia and is expensive. Again, not every area has a facility that can perform this kind
of imaging, but one could potentially be in an area with MRI access but without
scintigraphy access, so an MRI might come to be a helpful tool in tumor assessment.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952703&ind=50&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Studies show that 16% to 38% of dogs with thyroid carcinoma have evidence of
tumor spread at the time of diagnosis.
Larger tumors are more likely to spread faster than smaller tumors.
When the thyroid carcinoma spreads, it usually goes to the lymph nodes of the
throat and neck and to the lungs.
Treatment
After the tumor has been assessed for spread and for depth, appropriate therapy can be
selected.
Surgery
If the tumor is freely moveable and no tumor spread can be detected, surgery is probably
the best choice. A median survival time of three years was reported in one retrospective
study of such cases. In February 2023, Enache et al published a study reviewing 144
dogs with thyroid carcinomas. Here are some interesting statistics:
77% of the dogs survived >500 days. The median survival time was 802 days.
In a third retrospective study of such cases, a median survival time of 20.5 months was
reported. If, however, the tumor is invasive and not mobile, excision will probably not be
complete and will likely have complications such as nerve damage or excessive
bleeding. It is best in this situation to pursue a different therapy.
External Beam Radiation Therapy
This form of therapy requires referral to a special radiation oncologist and such facilities
may not be readily available. In this therapy, the primary tumor in the throat is irradiated,
typically three times weekly. The tumor responds slowly (peak effect is usually seen 8 to
22 months after the treatment course has been completed). In one study of eight dogs, a
median survival time of 24.5 months was found. Side effects include a hoarse voice,
cough, and difficulty swallowing (usually, complications were self-limiting and resolved in
2-3 weeks). Later complications include baldness at the radiation site and dry cough in
fewer than 20% of patients. This type of therapy can be combined with surgery to
improve the outcome.
Radioiodine Therapy
As in hyperthyroid cats with benign thyroid nodules, iodine 131 can be used to treat
thyroid carcinoma in dogs. The advantage of this therapy is that the iodine can travel to
areas of tumor spread and be sequestered there. Iodine 131 emits beta particles (highspeed electrons) penetrating and destroying tissue for only a fraction of an inch. This
means the normal tissue is spared around the tumor, and only the tumor is treated. In one
study, this therapy yielded a median survival time of 30 months. Much higher doses of
iodine 131 are used in this situation than in the feline treatment of hyperthyroidism. This
translates to most dogs requiring thyroid supplementation at the end of therapy as there
will probably not be enough normal thyroid tissue left. As for other downsides, a special
diet is sometimes recommended prior to therapy to maximize the uptake of iodine 131 so
as to enhance the tumor’s response. Further, for a time after therapy, the dog is
radioactive and must be confined to a radio facility temporarily until their radiation
emission drops to a safe level. Most seriously, there is a risk of fatal bone marrow
suppression that goes with this type of radiotherapy though this risk is small (less than
10%).
Chemotherapy is under investigation as a treatment for thyroid carcinoma, but protocols
are still being worked out. Toceranib has been a promising medication plus there is some
evidence that treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) suppresses

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952703&ind=50&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Bilateral asymmetric adenomas in a cat. We are looking
down on the cat's front quarters as an aerial view. The
cat's nose faces the top of the frame. The salivary glands
appear as symmetrical red spots. The tumor is the large
white spot in the area of the neck. The front legs can be
seen alongside the neck. Image provided by Michael R.
Broome, DVM, MS, Dipl. ABVP and AVMI
the progression of many types of carcinomas. The use of these medications may be a
helpful adjunctive treatment.
Feline
While canine thyroid carcinomas do not
usually produce the excess hormone, the
opposite is true in cats; cats with thyroid
carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Hyperthyroidism is an extremely common
situation in older cats and the thyroid growth
involved is benign in over 95% of cases.
This makes finding less than 5 percent of
cats with malignancy all the more difficult to
distinguish.
A pertechnetate scan is needed to make the
distinction. If the owner is considering
radiotherapy for the treatment of
hyperthyroidism, the malignancy should be
identified as the scan normally precedes
radiotherapy. If the owner is opting for
another treatment (surgery, or oral
medication), the scan may not happen, and
the diagnosis will be missed.
In most cases when cats receive
radiotherapy for their hyperthyroidism, a
pertechnetate nuclear medicine scan
(scintigraphy) is performed to confirm the
diagnosis and to determine the dose of
iodine 131 needed to control the thyroid
disease. If the thyroid growth is malignant,
there are generally clues on the scan
suggesting that the tumor mass is more extensive than the more routine benign thyroid
growths. Assorted image criteria are used to make this determination but, of course, there
is no substitute for harvesting an actual tissue sample.
So when would you consider such a biopsy given that over 95% of thyroid growths are
benign? If the standard hyperthyroidism therapies (medication or radiotherapy) fail to
control thyroid levels, then there is a reason to pursue malignancy as the explanation.
Obviously, if the hyperthyroid cat is treated with surgical removal of the thyroid glands
(rarely done nowadays given the availability of radiotherapy and medication), then the
tissue would be biopsied to definitively settle the benign/malignant question. Right now,
the treatment of hyperthyroidism generally consists of a choice between radiotherapy,
medication, and possibly dietary therapy. The scan done in conjunction with radiotherapy
is probably the best way to identify the small group of cats that have malignant disease.
Since cats with benign or malignant thyroid tumors are generally hyperthyroid, it should
not be surprising that radiotherapy is probably the best treatment in either situation.
Thyroid tumors readily take up radioiodine regardless of whether they are benign or
malignant. In one study, cats with malignant thyroid tumors who received radioiodine
therapy were not only cured of their hyperthyroidism, but also the median survival from
their cancer was approximately three years. In cats with thyroid tumors who were not also
hyperthyroid, treatment is a little trickier. The pertechnetate scan helps determine the
tumor's ability to absorb radioiodine. If the tumor is not going to take up radioiodine, then
some other therapy (surgery or external beam radiation) is a better choice.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952703&ind=50&objTypeID=1007 4/5
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952703&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154423
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952703&ind=50&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Mammary Tumors in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 17, 2023
Published: December 23, 2002
We have all heard of breast cancer in women. With
approximately one woman in eight or nine falling victim to
this form of cancer, there are awareness campaigns from
numerous health care agencies and research
continues. What many pet owners do not know is that the
incidence of mammary tumor development in dogs is even
higher than it is for humans: one unspayed dog in four
is affected. This is a huge incidence, yet awareness
among owners of female dogs is lacking.
Protection from Spaying
A female puppy spayed before her first heat cycle can
expect never to develop a mammary tumor of any kind.
The incidence of tumor development in this group is nearly
zero.
If she is allowed to experience one heat cycle before
spaying, the incidence rises to 7 percent (still quite low).
If she is allowed to experience more than one heat cycle, the risk increases to one in four.
Since most female dogs come into heat the first time before age one and
breeding an immature female dog is not recommended, this means you must
generally choose between a litter of puppies or mammary cancer prevention.
Because mammary tumors are promoted by female hormones, spaying at any
age is helpful in preventing tumors. Just because a female dog is in the highrisk group doesn't mean it is too late to reap benefits of spaying.
Tumor Detection
If your dog is unspayed, was known to have had puppies, or was spayed in adulthood,
she fits into the high-risk group for mammary cancer development. It is important to be
somewhat familiar with the normal mammary anatomy of the female dog. There are five
sets of mammary glands, as shown, though the average female dog has only nine. (It is
not unusual for asymmetry of mammary glands to be found.) The normal glands should be
soft and pliant, especially towards the rear legs. There should be no firm lumps. If a lump
is detected, see your veterinarian at once regarding possible removal. Most tumors occur
in the glands nearest the rear legs.
Mammary tumors are most commonly diagnosed in dogs ages nine to 11 years.
You should begin conscientiously checking your female dog for growth starting
at age six years. This includes both unspayed female dogs and female dogs

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Mammary Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951841&ind=51&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Tumors in both cranial abdominal
mammary glands. It's best to detect and
remove tumors before they get this large.
Photo by MarVistaVet
Fine Needle Aspirate of a Mammary
Carcinoma
Photo courtesy of the University of Georgia.
spayed as adults.
Preparing for Surgery: Radiography
Staging the tumor before planning removal is ideal, and
this means checking to see if it has spread to the lungs.
If the tumor has already spread, removing the original
(primary) tumor in the mammary gland is likely not
going to be helpful unless the tumor is eroded or open
and needs removal for quality of life reasons. Further,
cancer in the chest is an important surgical risk factor,
and it should be ruled out before surgery. If there is
cancer in the chest, therapy must be directed toward
the whole dog rather than toward the localized tumor.
To see the most detail in the lungs, most oncologists
recommend three views of the chest (profile with left
side down, profile with right side down, and either top to
bottom or bottom to top). These views allow maximum
inflation of all parts of the lung so that even small
tumors can be seen. After surgery for a malignant
mammary tumor, similar radiographs are
periodically recommended to screen for
evidence of tumor spread in case some cells had
managed to escape surgical removal. In general,
if no spread has been detected after two years,
the tumor can be considered permanently cured.
Preparing for Surgery: Tissue Evaluation
There are many factors to consider when
planning to remove a mammary tumor. For
example, not all tumors in the mammary area
are mammary tumors. Some are mast cell
tumors or other types of skin tumors.
Furthermore, approximately 50 percent of
mammary tumors are benign in dogs, and
removal may not need to be aggressive in this
situation. It would be nice to know, going into
surgery, what the tumor type is and whether or
not it is malignant. To accomplish this, tissue
must be evaluated. An aspiration of cells will
yield enough information to determine if the
tumor is mammary and may indicate if it is benign or malignant. Unfortunately, there is
frequently some ambiguity in the latter part of this evaluation, making the evaluation of
malignancy challenging. An actual biopsy sample is more accurate.
Frequently, the surgeon will opt to attempt an excisional biopsy first. This not only
accurately identifies the tumor but potentially completely removes it, allowing for a cure in
one surgical procedure and sparing the expense of potentially less accurate pre-surgical
tissue. Obviously, it is not always possible to remove the entire tumor on the first surgery
in this way, but often, it is.
Hormone Receptors
Approximately 50 percent of malignant mammary tumors in dogs have receptors for either
estrogen or progesterone. These female hormones promote the growth of these tumors.
Benign tumors also have female hormone receptors and can be stimulated by the
hormonal cycling of the female dog. This means that spaying is important even if a tumor

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Mammary Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951841&ind=51&objTypeID=1007 2/4
A female dog has mammary glands in these
locations though a given individual may not have
them all. Graphic by MarVistaVet
has already developed; in one study, female dogs
spayed at the time of their tumor removal (or in
the two years prior to the tumor removal) lived 45
percent longer than those who remained
unspayed.
Types of Tumors
The following are common classes of mammary
tumors that might be found on a biopsy.
Fibroadenoma
A benign glandular tumor for which no treatment
is necessary.
Mixed Mammary Tumor
What is mixed is the type of cell that makes up
the tumor. (Mixed does not refer to a mix of
benign and malignant cells.) The mixed tumor
can be either benign or malignant, and the biopsy
will indicate this, though by far, most mixed
tumors are benign.
Adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinomas can be tubular or papillary,
depending on the gland cells from which the tumor arises. Adenocarcinomas behave
malignantly, but how aggressively malignant they are depends not on whether they are
tubular or papillary but on other cellular characteristics described by the pathologist (such
as how quickly the cells appear to be dividing and how closely they resemble normal
gland cells). After reading the description, the oncologist will be able to determine how
aggressively to combat the tumor.
Inflammatory Carcinoma
The inflammatory carcinoma is a highly malignant tumor that generates tremendous
inflammation locally with ulceration, pus, and discomfort. This type of tumor tends to
spread early in its course and is virtually impossible to treat. Because many less
malignant and more common mammary tumors also become ulcerated, this particularly
malignant tumor may not be diagnosed before surgery and frequently is unable to heal
from the very surgery needed to identify it. Fortunately, this especially tragic tumor type
accounts for less than 5% of mammary tumors.
In general, approximately 50% of malignant mammary tumors will have already
spread by the time of surgery. This means that the other 50% are locally confined,
and surgery is curative.
What Else Determines Prognosis?
The type of tumor is obviously important in determining the prognosis; further, spaying at
the time of tumor removal or before is also an important factor in determining prognosis.
Other factors include:
The size of the tumor. Tumors with diameters larger than 1.5 inches have a
worse prognosis than smaller tumors.
Evidence of spread to the lymphatic system (such as tumor cells in a local
lymph node or visible tumor cells within lymphatic vessels on the biopsy)
carries a worse prognosis.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Mammary Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951841&ind=51&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Deeper tumors or tumor adherence to deeper tissue structures carries a worse
prognosis.
An ulcerated tumor surface carries a worse prognosis.
A history of especially rapid growth carries a worse prognosis.
The biopsy sample will not only identify the tumor type but will also indicate
whether or not the tumor was completely removed (so-called clean or dirty
margins). If the tumor was not completely removed, you may wish to consider a
second surgery to remove more tissue.
Further Therapy?
Radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and anti-estrogen therapy have been used for
incompletely removed tumors. Sometimes it is most appropriate to monitor for recurrence
with periodic chest radiographs.
Specialized care is often required for cancer patients. Not all veterinarians are comfortable
performing oncology. Discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would
be best for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951841&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154451
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:37 PM Mammary Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951841&ind=51&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Cytology (microscope) showing mast cells taken from an
inflamed scrotum of a dog with a rapidly progressing
lesion. Courtesy Dr. Avery Tomlinson
Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 20, 2023
Published: December 28, 2003
What is a Mast Cell?
A normal mast cell is part of our immunologic defense systems against invading
organisms. Mast cells are meant to participate in the war against parasites (as opposed to
the war against bacterial or viral invaders). They are bound within tissues that interface
with the external world such as the skin, respiratory or intestinal tract. They do not
circulate through the body.
The mast cell possesses granules of
especially inflammatory biochemicals meant
for use against invading parasites. Think of
these as small bombs that can be released.
The mast cell has binding sites on its surface
for a type of antibody called IgE. IgE is
produced in response to exposure to
antigens typical of parasites (i.e., worm skin
proteins, or similarly shaped proteins). IgE
antibodies, which are shaped like tiny Ys,
find their way to a tissue mast cell and perch
there. With enough exposure to the antigen
in question, the mast cell may be covered
with Y-shaped IgE antibodies like the fluff of
a dandelion. The mast cell is said, at this
point, to be sensitized.
As said, the IgE antibodies are Y-shaped.
Their foot is planted in the mast cell while
their arms lift up hoping to capture the
antigen for which they were individually
designed. When the antigen comes by and
is grasped by the IgE antibodies, this should
indicate that a parasite is near and the mast
cell, like a land mine, degranulates releasing
its toxic biochemical weapons. These
chemicals are harmful to the parasite plus
they serve as signals to other immune cells that a battle is in progress, and for them to
come and join in.
The problem is that we live in a clean world without a lot of parasites. What unfortunately
tends to happen is that the IgE/mast cell system is stimulated with other antigens that are
of similar shape or size as parasitic antigens. These next best antigens are usually pollen
proteins and the result is an allergy. Instead of killing an invading parasite, the mast cell
biochemicals produce local redness, itch, swelling, and other symptoms we associate with
allergic reactions.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Dog with mast cell tumor on lip. Courtesy of
Dr. Scott Vaughan
And the Mast Cell Tumor?
As if the mast cell isn't enough of a troublemaker in this regard, it can form a tumor made
of many mast cells. When this happens, the tumor cells are unstable. This means they
release their toxic granules with simple contact or even at random, creating allergic
symptoms that do not correlate with exposure to any particular antigen. Simply handling
the tumor can cause it to degranulate, leading to redness, itching, and/or swelling.
Growths that get suddenly larger and then smaller over a 24-hour period are likely to be
mast cell tumors and this phenomenon is referred to as Darier's sign.
Furthermore, mast cell tumors are notoriously invasive and difficult to treat. Part of the
problem is that what appears to be the visible margin of the tumor is rarely the actual
margin. (Picture an octopus where the body is part of the tumor you see, but there are
invisible tentacles extending out in many directions.) Because it is not possible to see the
true tumor margins with the naked eye, excision must be broad and deep and the tumor
may not be located on a part of the body where this is possible.
Canine
Mast cell tumors are the most common skin tumor in dogs, with between seven and 21
percent of all canine skin tumors being mast cell tumors. Mast cell tumors do not have to
involve the skin and can develop internally but most of the time there is skin involvement.
While any dog can develop a mast cell tumor, several breeds have an especially high rate
of mast cell tumor development (four to eight times the rate of the general canine
population). These breeds are the boxer, the Rhodesian ridgeback, the pug, the Boston
terrier, the pit bull terrier, and the Weimaraner. The Shar-pei tends to develop its mast cell
tumors at an earlier age and they tend to be especially malignant.
Diagnosis can often be made with a needle aspirate, which collects some cells of the
tumor with a needle, and the cells are examined under the microscope. The granules
have distinct staining characteristics leading to their recognition. An actual tissue biopsy,
however, is needed to grade the tumor, and grading of the tumor is crucial to determining
prognosis.
Grading the Mast Cell Tumor: The Patnaik System and
the Kiupel System
The pathologist will most likely use both of these
systems to grade the mast cell tumor. The grade is a
reflection of the malignant characteristics of the cells
under the microscope (which of course generally
correlates to the behavior of the tumor). In the
Patnaik system, mast cell tumors are graded either I,
II, or III with Grade I being benign, Grade III being
malignant, and Grade II having some ability to go
either way. In the Kiupel system, which was designed
to clear up some of the ambiguity of the Grade II
tumors, the mast cell tumor is simply classified as
low-grade or high grade with high-grade tumors far
more likely to behave malignantly.
Grade I Tumors
This is the best type of mast cell tumor to have. While
it may tend to be larger and more locally invasive
than may be visually apparent, it tends not to spread
beyond its place in the skin. Surgery should be curative and no chemotherapy or other
treatment is generally needed. That said, the tumor is still octopus-shaped with tentacles
that extend away from the visible growth. This means that if the entire tumor has not been
removed, it has the potential to grow back in its original location.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 2/7
The biopsy report will include margins, which refer to the amount of tumor-free tissue
surrounding the tumor tissue. If the original biopsy sample shows that the tumor has only
narrowly been removed (narrow margins) or that the tumor extends to the margins of the
sample (dirty margins), you have real potential for the tumor to regrow. If you wish to
permanently remove the tumor, a second surgery will be needed to take away more
tissue. The grade I tumor is unlikely to involve anything other than local irritation but,
again, if the margins are not clean, consider a deeper resection. About half of all mast cell
tumors are Grade 1 tumors and can be cured with surgery alone.
Grade II Tumors
This type of tumor is somewhat unpredictable in its behavior, which makes it difficult to
determine how aggressive one should be in staging, treating, etc. Additional staining of
the tumor with silver particles (AgNor staining), for c-kit granule patterns, and other
structures is sometimes used. Many reference laboratories will offer staining packages to
elucidate all the possible factors that have been investigated as possible indicators of
malignant behavior. These staining tests have been fraught with controversy, which brings
us to another factor that helps predict tumor behavior: the mitotic index. This index
examines the tumor for cells in the active process of division in a given moment to get an
idea of how rapidly the tumor is growing. The higher the index, the more malignant the
tumor is expected to be. (Dogs with a mitotic index of 5 or less with a grade II tumor had a
median survival time of 70 months vs. dogs with a mitotic index of greater than 5 who had
a median survival time of 5 months). The mitotic index turns out to be an important
predictor of behavior, which brings us to the Kiupel Grading System.
Grade III Tumors
This is the worst type of mast cell tumor to have. Grade III tumors account for
approximately 25 percent of all mast cell tumors and they behave invasively and
aggressively. They will readily spread to the spleen, liver, and bone marrow and can have
extensive skin involvement. Surgery alone is unlikely to control a Grade III tumor and
adjunctive treatment of some type is likely going to be necessary. What that should entail
will depend on several other factors such as the location of the tumor, results of staging
etc.
Grading with the Kiupel System
The Patnaik system has been in use for a long time but its grading system is somewhat
subjective and every pathologist may not classify a given mast cell tumor into the same
grade. The Kiupel system attempts to make the process more objective by using the
mitotic index. To determine the tumor's mitotic index, 10 high-power microscopic views
(fields) of the tumor are examined for cells in the process of division. The mitotic index
refers to the number of actively dividing cells per 10 high-power fields. Based on
variations in cell nucleus size, the frequency of finding cells with more than 3 nuclei, and a
mitotic index of higher or lower than 7, the tumor is either high grade or low grade.
High Grade Mast Cell Tumors
These tumors share a universally bad prognosis with survival times of less than four
months. They behave aggressively and require more aggressive therapy.
Low-Grade Mast Cell Tumors
These tumors overall showed a median survival time of greater than two years but there
were some tumors that behaved aggressively despite their low grade. Additional factors
add to what makes a better or worse prognosis when it comes to low-grade tumors. These
factors are reviewed below.
What Comes After Diagnosis?

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 3/7
After the mast cell tumor has been confirmed and graded, the next steps are geared
towards identifying factors that will determine prognosis and/or might limit the therapy
options. Relevant factors to prognosis include: the grade and mitotic index of the tumor
(which we have already discussed), the tumor staging (how far it has spread so far), tumor
margins (how much tumor is leftover after surgical removal), the location of the tumor on
the body, and concurrent health issues.
Basic Blood Work
Most likely a basic blood panel has been obtained and evaluated by this point but
certainly, if it hasn't this would be the time. This testing will help show any factors that limit
kidney or liver function and thus determine what drugs of chemotherapy can or cannot be
used. It also will show if there are circulating mast cells in the blood (a very bad sign) or if
anemia (low red blood cell count) is present which might be related to the tumor.
Staging the Mast Cell Tumor
In order for a rational therapeutic plan to be devised, the extent of tumor spread (or stage
of the tumor) must be determined. The World Health Organization has determined a
clinical staging system based on the body areas affected by the tumor. Between the stage
and the grade, a plan can be devised. The tumor is staged 0 through IV as described
below:
Stage 0: one tumor but incompletely excised from the skin (i.e. dirty margins).
Stage I: one tumor confined to the skin with no regional lymph node
involvement.
Stage II: one tumor confined to the skin but with regional lymph node
involvement present.
Stage III: many tumors or large deeply infiltrating tumors, with or without lymph
node involvement.
Stage IV: any tumor with distant spread evident. This stage is further divided
into substage a (no clinical signs of illness) and substage b (with clinical signs
of illness). In order to determine the tumor stage some probing of other
lymphoid organs must be performed.
In order to stage the tumor, chest radiographs are typically obtained to evaluate lymph
nodes in the chest. Any enlarged lymph nodes are aspirated for cell samples as are any
lymph nodes local to the original tumor (regardless of enlargement). Ultrasound of the
abdomen is performed to evaluate the spleen and liver. The spleen and liver are
frequently aspirated as well to look for mast cells. The bone marrow may be sampled to
see if there is mast cell infiltration there.
Therapy
Mast cell tumors in the following areas tend to behave more malignantly than their grade
would suggest: nail bed, genital areas, the area around the anus, muzzle, ear flap, and
mouth.
Therapy for mast cell tumors consists of surgery, radiation therapy, and chemotherapy (as
is the case for almost all types of cancer). What combination of the above is chosen
depends on the extent of spread and malignant characteristics of the tumor.
Surgery
If the tumor can be cured with one or even two surgeries, this is ideal. Mast cell tumors
are highly invasive, and very deep and extensive margins - at least 2 cm in all directions -
are needed. This can be a problem for tumors located on the neck or in the mouth.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 4/7
Further, the inflammation associated with manipulating the tumor can lead to extra
swelling, bleeding, and even a drop in blood pressure. In one study, a 10% incidence of
wound healing failure (dehiscence) was observed with mast cell tumors.
The biopsy sample will not only yield the grade of the tumor but will include a
measurement of the tissue margin (the width of normal tissue that has been excised
around the tumor). The width of the margins will go far in determining if further treatment
is needed. If the margins are narrow or margins indicate there is still a tumor left behind
then a second surgery or even a course of radiation therapy may be desirable. Clean
margins are generally defined as a 20 mm margin around the tumor in all directions. If the
margin is clean, theoretically the tumor should be completely removed but it is still a good
idea to keep an eye on the area over the years.
Radiation Therapy
While radiation therapy tends to be expensive and requires a facility that may not be
conveniently located, radiation has the potential to permanently cure a grade I or II mast
cell tumor. Radiation is most appropriate for localized disease. If the tumor stage suggests
a more distant spread is likely, radiation becomes less helpful and medications
(chemotherapy) that can be delivered to the tumor through the patient's blood vessels are
needed.
In January 2004, Hahn, King, and Carreras published a study where radiation therapy was
used to treat incompletely removed Grade III mast cell tumors. They studied 31 dogs with
Grade III mast cell tumors that did not show evidence of distant spread beyond the
external area where the tumor was first detected. They treated these dogs with radiation
sessions given three days a week for a total of 18 sessions. Approximately 65% of dogs
achieved remission and 71% were alive one year after treatment. The median remission
time was approximately 28 months with dogs having ear or genital tumors doing better
than dogs with tumors in other locations. Dogs with tumors less than or equal to 3 cm in
diameter prior to surgery had a median survival time of 31 months. These are optimistic
findings for the Grade III mast cell tumor, even though radiotherapy is an expensive
treatment method.
Chemotherapy
When the tumor is no longer localized or is too large for surgery or radiotherapy to control,
medication may be helpful to control tumor growth and spread. There are several new
medications available and newer ones are constantly being investigated.
Chemotherapy medications that are commonly used currently include: vinblastine (an
injection series) usually combined with prednisolone, lomustine (oral or
injectable), and toceranib phosphate (oral). Treatment protocols vary in expenses and
side effects potential. Discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a specialist is in
the best interest of you and your dog.
Corticosteroids: A Special Mention
Corticosteroids (prednisolone, dexamethasone, etc.) seem to be directly toxic to mast
cells and can lead to a brief remission even when used alone. Corticosteroids are
inexpensive treatments and definitely worth trying should more powerful chemotherapy
drugs be considered too expensive or troublesome.
Tigilanol tiglate: Something New
Tigilanol tiglate (Stelfonta®) is a new treatment released in the summer of 2020 and is
best used for dogs where the mast cell tumor cannot be adequately addressed surgically.
Tigilanol tiglate is injected directly into the tumor where it interrupts the tumor blood
supply, kills the tumor (up to 80% of tumor cells whereas conventional products kill 40-
50% of tumor cells), and promotes healing of the area. The injection leads to a great deal

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Courtesy of Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
of swelling and bruising, followed by an open wound that heals over several weeks. The
manufacturer recommends leaving the healing wound uncovered, which may not be
acceptable for some pet families.
Treating the Inflammation
The histamine and other inflammatory mediators that are constantly leaked by the mast
cell tumor can produce a great deal of inflammation throughout the body. Histamine in
particular is a strong stimulus for the production of stomach acid which can lead to
stomach ulcers, vomiting, and pain. Antihistamines are frequently used to address the
effects of histamine throughout the body. Famotidine is a histamine-blocking antacid
commonly used in the palliation of mast cell tumor disease. Other antihistamines such as
loratadine and diphenhydramine may be helpful in addressing histamine issues outside of
the stomach.
Feline
The mast cell tumor situation is slightly different
for cats though most of the same concepts hold
true (so if you skipped the canine section to read
the feline information it would be best to go back
and read it). Mast cell tumors classically affect
older cats; in one study the average age was 10
years. There are two forms of feline mast cell
tumors: Cutaneous (involving skin) or visceral
(involving internal organs, usually intestine or
spleen). Tumors are not graded as they are in
dogs and staging guidelines are far less defined.
Cutaneous Forms
The skin form of the feline mast cell tumor
classically arises around the head, neck, limbs or
tail. Lesions may be solitary or multiple, with
multiple lesions not necessarily boding poorly (though if there are many mast cell tumors,
that would constitute rather a lot of inflammatory biochemicals and more symptoms for the
cat). Pathologists classify cutaneous mast cell tumors as either mastocytic or atypical.
Mastocytic mast cell tumors can be further classified as well-differentiated or pleomorphic.
Well-differentiated tumors tend to behave benignly and are generally amenable to surgical
removal. Most cutaneous mast cell tumors in cats fit into this category. The pleomorphic
tumors are more locally aggressive and harder to completely excise. They have more
potential to spread in a cancerous fashion.
Atypical cutaneous mast cell tumors erupt in younger adult cats and even kittens. The
Siamese breed is predisposed to this unusual tumor type. If possible, atypical tumors
should be removed but they have been known to regress spontaneously, which is part of
what makes them atypical.
Surgery is the treatment of choice for any cutaneous mast cell tumor.
Visceral Forms
As one might surmise, mast cell tumors located internally are more serious than those in
the skin. The most common organs involved are the spleen, liver, and intestine. Vomiting,
appetite loss, and weight loss are the most common symptoms. If the spleen is involved,
its removal can be very therapeutic; however, results depend on how widespread the
disease is. A subset of cats has a median survival time of 12 to 19 months after
splenectomy while cats with more disseminated disease have a median survival of 132
days after splenectomy.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 6/7
No single chemotherapy protocol has emerged as being particularly successful above the
others. Unlike the canine situation, it is not all that helpful to stage the disease with buffy
coat smears and bone marrow taps as tumor cells in these locations have not altered
prognosis, although localizing the disease to the spleen with a splenic aspirate might be
particularly useful. The most telling piece of information for prognosis actually comes from
the history: appetite. Cats that are eating decently at the time they are first brought to the
veterinarian have a median survival of 19 months, while cats that are not eating have a
median survival of 8 weeks. Splenectomy is not helpful for cats without splenic
involvement.
Not all veterinarians are comfortable treating mast cell cancer. Discuss with your
veterinarian whether referral to a cancer specialist would be best for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952018&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154476
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Mast Cell Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952018&ind=52&objTypeID=1007 7/7
Meningiomas are found in the meninges, the membrane
tissues surrounding the brain and spinal cord. The
meningioma in this diagram is shown over the cerebrum,
the largest part of the brain.
Meningioma in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 15, 2024
Published: April 27, 2005
The Most Common Brain Tumor of Dogs and
Cats
The idea that someone we care about has a
brain tumor is virtually unthinkable; yet,
sometimes it must be considered.
Meningioma is probably the most common
cause of seizures in dogs over six years of
age. It helps us to know our enemy and
there is a fair amount to know about this
tumor. The meningioma tumor accounts for
approximately 50% of all brain tumors in
dogs and up to 85% in cats.
The meninges are the membranes that line
the skull and vertebral column, effectively
surrounding the central nervous system,
which consists of the brain and spinal cord.
Often the words "brain tumor" lead us to
conjure an image of a growth deep and
inaccessible inside the brain, but this is not
what a meningioma is. Because the
meningioma is a tumor of the meninges (the
outer membranes) these tumors grow from
the skull inward. This makes them much
more accessible surgically, depending on
their size, than you might have at first
thought.
Meningiomas are generally benign, meaning
that they do not create cancer. They do not
spread to other areas of the body or invade
and destroy tissue local to them. These
tumors are problematic as there is a limited
amount of space within the skull. The brain
and its bath of cerebrospinal fluid take up
almost all the room and when a tumor
begins to grow, the brain tissue is
compressed. Inflammation can result leading to more swelling and soon nerves of the
brain are damaged.
Meningioma Signs

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Meningioma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952261&ind=53&objTypeID=1007 1/4
CT Scan of Dog Head
In dogs, seizures are the most common sign. In cats, signs are vaguer and consist of
listlessness and behavior changes.
The following signs have been reported with meningiomas, largely depending on the brain
area involved:
Walking in circles
Blindness
Dragging toes
Drunken gait.
Meningioma Characteristics
While there are meninges surrounding both the brain and spinal cord,
meningeal tumors almost always arise in the meninges around the brain.
(About 14% of canine meningiomas and 4% of feline meningiomas involve the
spinal cord.)
Meningiomas are classified based on the different cell types they involve.
Different types have different growth rates.
Meningiomas are usually benign in that they do not spread to other body areas.
Oddly, meningiomas contain high numbers of progesterone receptors. In dogs,
the number of progesterone receptors a meningioma contains correlates to
more aggressive progression. This means that anti-progesterone medications
may be helpful. In cats, there is no such correlation. Anti-progesterone therapy
is still under investigation at this time.
95% of canine meningiomas occur in dogs over seven years of age. Most
affected cats are over the age of 10 years.
Dogs with long noses (particularly collies) seem to be predisposed.
In cats, meningiomas tend to have a more rubbery texture than in their canine
counterparts. This makes the feline tumor a bit easier to remove.
In dogs, most meningiomas occur in the front of the skull. This is where the
olfactory lobes (which control the sense of smell) are located. Altered sense of
smell may easily lead to a behavior change or appetite change.
What Kind of Testing is Done for a Possible Brain Tumor?
A basic blood panel, and urinalysis if possible, is the foundation for virtually every medical
workup as this will help assess the patient’s general health. Obviously, it is important to
identify if there are any other problems to contend with but it is worth pointing out that
routine blood work cannot confirm a brain tumor.
Chest radiographs are important to screen for cancer spread. Often, brain tumors are the
result of the spread of a malignancy that developed somewhere else. In one study, 55% of
brain tumors had not started in the brain but had spread there from some other location.
The central test for a brain tumor is
imaging of the brain: either CT
(sometimes called CAT scan) or
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging).
These techniques allow imaging of
the brain so that the tumor can be
located specifically and
distinguished from areas of blood
clots or inflammation. Radiographs
simply cannot penetrate the skull
bone and it is only since these more
advanced technologies have

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Meningioma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952261&ind=53&objTypeID=1007 2/4
CT scan of a dog's skull with a meningioma. Image of this dog's brain
shows a large tumor located in the right cerebral hemisphere. The
left hemisphere is normal. Image courtesy of Dr. William Thoma
become available that imaging the
brain is possible. The MRI is
preferred over CT as it can better
identify fluid build-up, swelling,
cysts, bleeding, and other subtle
soft tissue changes inside the brain.
Treatment
Medication
If the goal is palliation, in other
words just keeping the pet
comfortable and minimizing
seizures, prednisone can be used
to relieve swelling in the brain tissue
and anti-seizure medication such as
phenobarbital or potassium bromide can be used to control seizures. Prednisone is
surprisingly effective in shrinking a meningioma simply by decreasing tumor blood flow. In
one study the tumor’s blood volume was 21% reduced within 24 hours of beginning
prednisone. Eventually, the tumor will grow too big to respond to these tactics but for a
time they are usually effective (3-6 months survival in one study).
A more definitive therapy involves surgical removal of the tumor and/or radiation therapy,
both very expensive treatments.
Surgery
As noted earlier, in cats meningioma is an easier tumor to remove than it is in dogs. Most
cats do well with surgery and mortality is low. As the tumor has benign behavior in cats,
generally speaking survival rates are good. In one study, 71% were alive 6 months after
surgery, 66% were alive one year after surgery and 50% were alive two years after
surgery. Approximately one cat in five will have a tumor recurrence within 27 months.
The story is a bit different in the dog where the tumor is less well defined. Canine tumors
tend to be more invasive into the surrounding brain and it is hard for the surgeon to tell
where to cut (approximately 1/3 of canine meningiomas infiltrate normal brain tissue). That
said, a study published in March of 2022 by A.K. Forward et al looked at outcomes for 101
dogs having meningioma surgery and found that 94% survived to go home and a median
survival time was 386 days. (Approximately 50% died in the first year, 25% survived 1-2
years, and 15% survived 2-3 years). These are very optimistic statistics.
A piece of equipment called an ultrasonic aspirator seems to be improving the situation.
This piece of equipment has a vibrating tip that breaks up tissue and then suctions it
away, making for less bleeding and less swelling. In one study, meningiomas removed
with this piece of equipment showed a 42-month median survival time.
Different types of meningiomas are associated with different postoperative survival times.
Surgery enables the tumor tissue to be not only removed, thereby treating the disease,
but enables tissue sampling which can be used to get a better sense of prognosis in a
given dog.
Radiation
There are many different schedules used for radiation treatments: some weekly, some
daily, some on alternate days. Radiation can be done instead of surgery or in combination
with surgery. Which protocols yield the longest survival times is not clear. Currently, the

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Meningioma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952261&ind=53&objTypeID=1007 3/4
philosophy on treatment is that a combination of surgery plus radiation yields the best
results for dogs. Cats seem to do so well with surgery that recommendations lean away
from radiation.
Radiosurgery
Radiosurgery involves using a focused dose of radiation to a well-defined target in the
brain, effectively cutting a deep lesion away. Instead of using one radiation beam, several
beams are focused on the target such that the path of each beam through the brain is not
damaged but the target where all the beams come together is destroyed. This technique
is called stereotactic radiosurgery and uses either an adapted linear accelerator (a LINAC)
or a Gamma Knife, as is done in human brain tumor surgery. This procedure is particularly
attractive as it is a one-time treatment rather than a series of radiation treatments. The
tumor must be small (less than one inch in diameter) for this type of treatment to work,
and currently, only a few facilities offer it.
Chemotherapy
For chemotherapy to be effective against brain tumors, the drugs used must be able to
cross the blood-brain barrier, the biological shield that protects the brain from metabolic
changes in the body reflected in the bloodstream. Only a few medications are available
and results have been unexciting in cats and possibly promising in dogs. This area of
oncology is rapidly progressing so you or your veterinarian may wish to seek the advice of
a veterinary oncologist regarding the best treatment for your pet.
Autologous Tumor Lysate Immunotherapy
This therapy is performed after surgery and involves making a vaccine out of the tumor
tissue that was removed. The tumor tissue is broken down into proteins and given as
injections to train the immune system to attack any leftover tumor cells. In one study with
dogs, the median survival of patients with surgery alone was 426 days and this increased
to 870 days when immunotherapy was added after surgery.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952261&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154500
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Meningioma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952261&ind=53&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: April 13, 2020
Multiple myeloma is a cancer of plasma cells, which develop from a type of white blood
cell called a B cell. Plasma cells produce antibodies, which are used by the body to fight
infections. In patients that develop multiple myeloma, these plasma cells multiply
uncontrollably.
Multiple myeloma is rare in cats and dogs. Scientists have not yet been able to discover
why this type of cancer occurs. Potential factors that lead to a pet developing multiple
myeloma are genetics or inheritance from a parent, certain viral infections, exposure to
carcinogens, and continual stimulation of the immune system (for example, having a
chronic illness).
When multiple myeloma occurs, the number of plasma cells increase unchecked. They
are created in the bone marrow, so typically over time, their overproduction crowds out
other cells made in the bone marrow such as other types of white blood cells, red blood
cells, and platelets. This form of multiple myeloma is the classic appearance in people and
dogs. Cats may also develop this form of the disease, but more often develop plasma cell
cancer in organs outside the bone marrow, such as the liver or spleen.
Secondary diseases, sometimes known as paraneoplastic syndromes, are common with
multiple myeloma. Many of these occur because of changes in the immune system
caused by plasma cell overproduction. Examples include renal/kidney disease, elevated
calcium levels, bone loss (also known as osteolysis), decreased immune function,
bleeding disorders, and increased blood thickness (known as hyperviscosity syndrome).
Symptoms include acting tired and/or weak, vomiting or throwing up, loose stools, and not
wanting to eat. Unfortunately, many other issues can cause these symptoms as well, so at
first it may be difficult to figure out what is wrong with your pet. Drinking and urinating a
lot, trouble walking, and signs of bleeding (e.g. nosebleeds, bleeding gums, pale skin,
bruising) may also be seen.
Because symptoms don’t point directly to the issue, different types of testing are needed
to diagnose multiple myeloma. A blood test to evaluate how the red blood cells, white
blood cells, and platelets are functioning, called a CBC or complete blood count, may be
performed. Another blood test called a serum biochemistry or biochemistry profile is also
commonly used. It gives the veterinarian information on how the internal organs are
functioning. In multiple myeloma and a few other diseases, the globulin level (a type of
protein) is usually increased. Serum biochemistry test will give information about the
globulin level as well. Additional lab tests may include some for bleeding irregularities,
urine testing, and a test to assess certain proteins in the blood, known as serum protein
electrophoresis. X-rays, ultrasound, and bone marrow aspiration or biopsy are frequently
done as well.
Treatments are available for multiple myeloma, but cure is rare. That being said,
treatments used will help the pet feel better, with improvement in symptoms noted within a
few weeks of starting therapy. Average survival times once a pet is diagnosed are 220-930

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9595860&ind=54&objTypeID=1007 1/2
days in dogs (depending on which treatments are used) and 42-281 days for cats. Pets
that do not receive any treatments do not live as long as most pets that are treated, but
how long they can live without treatment is not clear.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9595860&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154524
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:38 PM Multiple Myeloma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9595860&ind=54&objTypeID=1007 2/2
This cat has a nasal squamous cell carcinoma. Photo used with
permission from Dr. Barbara Stein.
Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 09, 2024
Published: September 03, 2007
Squamous cell carcinomas are
tumors that are locally destructive
and can spread aggressively in the
area where they have arisen. That
said, there are some circumstances
where it is possible to either cure or
achieve meaningful control of this
tumor, and the nasal form is one of
these situations.
The squamous cell carcinoma is
associated with sun exposure, and
this means that lesions on the whitefurred areas of the feline face are at
risk. The ear tips and nose are
particularly vulnerable, as one might
expect, as these areas are not wellprotected by fur.
These tumors begin as a small
scabby area that may not attract
much attention as it can be mistaken
for a minor abrasion. This minor abrasion, however, does not heal and continues to get
larger.
Because squamous cell carcinoma does not spread distantly in the body until late in its
course, this provides a window during which it can be successfully treated. Once it gets
too big, that window has closed even if the tumor has not yet spread.
Surgical Treatment
If the tumor is not too big, surgical removal is curative. That said, squamous cell
carcinoma can spread to surrounding tissues, so a wide margin of normal tissue must be
removed in order to get the whole tumor. If the tumor has grown too large, there will not
be enough tissue to get a good margin around it, and it will regrow, resuming its
destructive course.
The surgery is ideally done with laser equipment to reduce bleeding; it is probably best to
seek the skills of a surgery specialist or at least a veterinarian with a great deal of facial
surgery experience. Your veterinarian may recommend a nerve block during surgery to
help control pain after the procedure.
The leather of the nose is removed along with some of the surrounding haired skin. The
nasal opening will heal cosmetically but will look a little unusual. Discuss with your
veterinarian whether or not a referral to a specialist is in the best interest of you and your

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952685&ind=55&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Cat after nose leather removal for nasal squamous cell
carcinoma Image courtesy MarVistaVet
pet.
Surgical Recovery
Recovery can vary depending on the tumor size, location, and overall health of your cat.
Your veterinary surgeon will give you post- operative instructions and can tell you what to
monitor after taking your cat home, including what would be considered an emergency.
Preventing self-harm is crucial, and your cat may have to wear an e-collar or “cone” to
prevent pawing at their face and harming the surgical site(s). Pain medications and
antibiotics are commonly prescribed.
You may notice small drops of blood or nasal fluid coming from the nostrils right after
bringing your cat home. They may also cough or have a “rougher” sounding voice from
the tube placed during surgery which helps them to breathe while under anesthesia
(endotracheal tube). Many cats don’t want to eat as much after surgery, and your
veterinarian may recommend offering various foods to entice them, appetite stimulants,
and surgery site cleaning under sedation (to allow them to smell their food).
Any excessive bleeding, difficulty breathing, changes in sleeping habits, or other situations
after surgery should be discussed with your veterinarian.
Cryotherapy
Cryotherapy may be less invasive. This involves using a probe to freeze the tumor. Again,
this can be curative if the tumor is small enough, but in freezing the tissue, the cells are
damaged and can’t be analyzed by biopsy. The biopsy (lab analysis) of the tissue can
confirm squamous cell carcinoma and enables the pathologist to tell if the excision was
complete. This is valuable information that we would prefer not to forgo for obvious
reasons.
Side effects of cryotherapy are generally mild and include swelling, redness, and pain. For
the next 3-6 months your veterinarian will monitor your cat for signs of tumor regrowth.
Cats with tumors that have grown into surrounding tissues also need to be checked for
cancers in other areas. This may include X-rays of your cat’s chest and lymph node
exams. For cases of nasal squamous cell carcinoma caused by sun exposure, the ears
and eyelid margins also must be closely monitored along with the nose for regrowth of
cancerous areas.
Radiation Therapy
Radiotherapy is rapidly becoming the
treatment of choice. Strontium plesiotherapy
using strontium 90 involves applying a
localized radiation source to the tumor
directly for a brief period of time. (Imagine a
wand with a radiation source on the end.)
Radiation destroys tissue in a 3 mm
diameter from the source, which allows for
the destruction of small superficial tumors.
As with surgery, if the tumor is too big, it
cannot be cured.
Alternatively, external radiation beams can
be aimed at the tumor under general
anesthesia. In one study, 60 percent of
irradiated cats had a complete response,
and 33 percent had a partial response.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952685&ind=55&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Radiation therapy obviously requires specialized equipment that is usually found only in
specialty facilities. It is not available everywhere. A consultation with a veterinary
oncologist will help determine if a given patient is a good candidate and what is involved in
finding the nearest radiofacility.
Imiquimod 5% Creme
Imiquimod is an immunity-modifying topical crème that is palliative for tumors too large for
curative removal or to treat the more superficial form of squamous cell carcinoma called
Bowenoid carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma in situ. Imiquimod is a relatively
expensive product, and an upset stomach can result if the crème is licked (which it
inevitably would be).
NSAIDs
You may not know the term "cyclooxygenase," but you are probably familiar with human
anti-inflammatory cyclooxygenase inhibitors like aspirin, ibuprofen (Advil®), naproxen
(Aleve®), and others. While these human anti-inflammatories are not safe for cats, there
are some prescripton veterinary medications that are. This comes into play with nasal
squamous cell carcinomas because there is potential for carcinomas to express enough
cyclooxygenase that a feline-friendly non-steroidal anti-inflammatory pain reliever (such
as piroxicam, meloxicam, or robenacoxib) may have anti-tumor effects. These medications
are not completely without issues but may be helpful when other treatments are not an
option, especially since they offer some pain relief.
Prognosis (Outlook)
Nasal squamous cell carcinomas usually do spread to tissues close by, but are slow to
move to other areas in the body. Cats with superficial tumors (those that have not spread
to deeper tissues in the nose or face) have better outlooks vs. large and deeply
penetrating tumors.
Even though squamous cell carcinomas do not spread until relatively late in their course,
they can still be extremely difficult to address. The nasal version is an exception to the
poor prognosis rule as long as it is detected early and removed or treated with radiation
promptly.
The potential for a full recovery depends on the size and location of the tumor, treatment
procedures, and your cat’s overall health. Discuss your questions with your veterinarian.
Also, talk about what you and your cat might experience. This will help you prepare for
managing this condition as effectively as possible.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952685&pid=19239
2e5a826d-917b-4ca1-a5e9-740d187d0e92.1754154546
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Nasal Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952685&ind=55&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Courtney before surgery. All the visible teeth in this photo define the area that was later
removed; her lower jaw was amputated straight across behind the lower canine teeth.
Photo courtesy of David Jensen of Alaska Pet-ography.
Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: November 30, 2022
Published: August 06, 2007
When squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC)
occurs in the mouth
and throat, it’s called
oral squamous cell
carcinoma. In these
oral cases, the lesion
is usually located on
the gums or tonsils.
Squamous cell
carcinoma is the most
common oral cancer
in cats. In dogs, SCC
is the second most
common oral tumor.
The most common
location of oral SCC
in cats is on the base
of the tongue on the
underside. SCC may
also come from the gingiva (gums), particularly along the maxillary (upper) teeth. SCC on
the gingiva expand and progress locally and are usually associated with destruction of the
bone. SCC of the maxilla (upper jaw) often appears as a depressed, ulcerated area. The
tumors on the tongue, mandible (lower jaw), and pharynx (throat) tend to be proliferative
and raised.
SCC metastasizes (spreads) to the regional lymph nodes less than 10% of the time in
dogs and 31% of the time in cats. Metastasis to the lungs occurs 3-36% of the time in
dogs and 10% of the time in cats. SCC are typically very invasive and can become quite
large, especially in cats.
SCC affects middle-aged to older cats (range 7-20 years). There is no increased likelihood
based on breed or gender.
Signs
Signs can include drooling (with or without blood), difficulty eating, and halitosis (very bad
breath). Depending on the tumor’s location, the pet can have trouble swallowing or may
cough. If the mouth is too uncomfortable for the pet to eat normally, they will lose weight.
As is true with many cancers, affected dogs and cats tend to be older animals.
Diagnostic Tests

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952673&ind=56&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Diagnostics include radiographs (X-rays) of the local site, radiographs of the lungs to see
if it has spread (metastasized) to other locations, CT scans, biomarker assessment
(laboratory tests), and biopsies. Sometimes a fine needle aspirate will provide enough
sample tissue for diagnosis. In a study of oral SCCs, biomarkers (such as proliferating cell
nuclear antigen and Ki-67) were associated with higher-grade tumors and increased
likelihood of spread.
Treatment
Treatment may involve surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, electromagnetic
thermoablation, supportive therapy, or a combination of these depending on location, the
amount of tissue involved, etc. Your primary veterinarian or veterinary oncologist will
recommend treatment options specifically for your pet’s condition.
Surgery
If the tumor hasn’t spread, surgery is the preferred treatment. The entire tumor, including
the extensions into underlying tissue and bone, will be removed. Often, part of the
jawbone has to be removed. Surgery can provide a cure if the pet has clean margins (the
tumor was completely removed). Dogs do quite well with partial jaws. It doesn’t typically
alter the dog’s appearance as much as people might expect. Even if surgery isn’t curative,
surgery can extend survival.
As for cats, following radical mandibulectomy (removal of the lower jaw) most can eat
independently, but a few may require hand feeding. In cats, surgical excision, with or
without partial removal of the tongue, may be considered for SCC of the tongue. When
dealing with SCC of the pharynx (throat) or tonsils, the specialist may recommend
removing as much of the mass as possible to make the cat more comfortable. This is
palliative, but it’s not curative.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy can be used if surgery isn’t an option, or if surgery can’t completely
remove the tumor.
In cats, radiation therapy is not very effective as the sole therapy for SCC because
median survival times (MST) range from only a few weeks to months. In a report of
combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy, the overall MST was 163 days, and cats with
tumors of the tonsil or cheek had MST of 724 days. Radiation therapy has been used as
palliative care for cats with nonresectable SCC.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy may be added to therapy, depending on the circumstances. Chemotherapy
has some drawbacks, so your veterinarian or oncology specialist will have to determine if
this treatment would be useful.
Electromagnetic Thermoablation
Electromagnetic thermoablation (hyperthermia, in which body tissue is exposed to high
temperatures) may be used. This technique applies a high-frequency alternating
electromagnetic field to heat alloy needles. The needles are placed into and surrounding
the tumor to destroy the malignant tissue.
Supportive Therapy
Supportive therapy includes pain medications, acupuncture, feeding tubes to provide
nutritional support, antibiotics for secondary infections, etc. A few cats with oral SCC have
been treated with the medication zoledronate in an attempt to reduce bony destruction
and pain. Pamidronate is also a medication option for cats. Your veterinarian will work with
you to determine what therapies apply to your pet.
Monitoring

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952673&ind=56&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Courtney two years after surgery. Although the jaw is
foreshortened, excess skin was shaped in surgery to help
improve function and also extend the appearance of the
lower jaw. Photo by Peg Banks.
Frequent examinations are needed to watch
for recurrence or progression. Periodic
monitoring to watch for evidence of
spreading disease, such as feeling the
lymph nodes, lymph node aspiration, and
chest X-rays are also indicated.
Prognosis
Prognosis For Dogs
The median survival time for dogs that have
mandibular (lower jaw) SCC treated with
surgery alone varies from 19-43 months,
with a 1-year survival of 88-100%, a 2-year
survival of 79%, and a 3-year survival of
58%. The median survival time for maxillary
(upper jaw) SCC that was treated with
maxillectomy varies from 10-39 months. The
local recurrence rate after mandibulectomy
or maxillectomy is less than 10%. Tumorassociated inflammation and invasion of the
lymphatic system are indicators of a poorer
prognosis. Overall survival times are lower
with SCC of the tonsils. In one study, the
median survival time was only 243 days,
with a 1-year survival rate of 40% and a 2-
year survival rate of 20%. The longest survival times occurred when surgery and
chemotherapy were used together.
Prognosis For Cats
Overall prognosis is poor. One study of 21 cats treated with mandibulectomy reported a
median survival time (MST) of 217 days, with 1 and 2-year survival of 43%. The local
recurrence rate was 38%. Cats with rostral (nose/mouth) tumors had a longer MST of 911
days. When SCCs of all oral tissues are included, MST with no therapy is only 30-45
days. MST was 106 days following stereotactic radiotherapy for oral SCC of any location,
with 38.5% of the cats showing a positive response. Most cats with this tumor type die of
uncontrolled local disease. Another factor adversely affecting survival is that many cats
with advanced SCC have metastatic disease (lymph node 31%, lungs 10%) at the time of
diagnosis.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952673&pid=19239
07879f4b-28b7-403e-b724-4d861ed54ca6.1754154568
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Oral Squamous Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4952673&ind=56&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Compare bone consistency above the
tumor and notice how the abnormal
bone looks eaten away by the tumor.
Photo by MarVistaVet
Osteosarcoma in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 30, 2019
Published: March 29, 2002
What is Osteosarcoma?
Osteosarcoma is by far the most common bone tumor of
dogs, usually striking the leg bones of larger breeds.
Osteosarcoma usually occurs in middle aged or elderly
dogs but can occur in a dog of any age; larger breeds
tend to develop tumors at younger ages.
Osteosarcoma can develop in any bone but the
limbs account for 75-85 percent of affected
bones. Osteosarcoma of the limbs is called
appendicular osteosarcoma. It develops deep
within the bone and becomes progressively
more painful as it grows outward and the bone
is destroyed from the inside out. The lameness
goes from intermittent to constant over 1 to 3
months. Obvious swelling becomes evident as
the tumor grows and normal bone is replaced
by tumorous bone.
Tumorous bone is not as strong as normal bone
and can break with minor injury. This type of
broken bone is called a pathologic fracture and
may be the finding that confirms the diagnosis
of bone tumor. Pathologic fractures will not heal and there is no point in putting
on casts or attempting surgical stabilization.
How do we Know my Dog Really has an Osteosarcoma?
Radiographs (x-rays)
The lytic lesion looks like an area of bone has been eaten away. One of the first steps in
evaluating a persistent lameness is radiography (x-rays). Bone tumors are tender so it is
usually clear what part of the limb should be radiographed. The osteosarcoma creates
some characteristic findings.
The sunburst pattern – shows as a corona effect as the tumor grows outward
and pushes the more normal outer bone up and away.
A pathologic fracture may be seen through the abnormal bone.
Osteosarcoma does not cross the joint space to affect other bones in the joint.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 1/7
An osteosarcoma patient's chest radiograph early in the disease. Photo
by MarVistavet
Radiography is almost completely diagnostic in most cases, but there are a few other far
less common conditions that can mimic the appearance of a bone tumor, so a confirming
test is going to be needed if one is to be complete. If a basic blood panel and urinalysis
haven't been done, this would also be a good time to do so as basic information about
liver and kidney function will be needed for treatment regardless of whether this turns out
to be a bone tumor or not; plus, a tissue sample from the bone is needed for confirmation
(see later).
Tissue Sampling: Biopsy and Needle Aspirate
Radiographs are close to being confirmatory but still they are not definitive. Since life and
death decisions are going to be made, it is best to obtain a tissue sample for confirmation.
This can be done by either biopsy or by needle aspirate.
Biopsy
A small piece of bone can be harvested surgically. The bone is preserved, sectioned, and
examined under the microscope to confirm the diagnosis of osteosarcoma. There are
several problems associated with this diagnostic. Sometimes a bone tumor is surrounded
by an area of bone inflammation and it may be difficult to get a representative sample. The
tiny hole that results when a core of bone is removed can create a weak spot and the
bone can actually break. Even if the procedure goes well, often there is increased pain
and lameness for the patient afterwards. With so many potential problems, most
specialists have switched to needle aspirate for diagnosis.
Needle Aspirate
With needle aspirate, a large bore needle is inserted into the area of the tumor and cells
are withdrawn for analysis. A full core of bone is not removed, just a sampling of cells.
This is usually sufficient to confirm osteosarcoma. If there is ambiguity, certain stains can
often settle any questions the pathologist may have.
With a Diagnosis Confirmed, Staging is the next Consideration
Osteosarcoma is an aggressive
tumor and it can be assumed to
have spread by the time it is first
diagnosed; there is no possibility of
preventing spread. That said, how
well treatments can be expected to
work depend on whether or not the
tumor spread has progressed so
as to be visible. Because
osteosarcoma spreads to the lungs
as one of its first stops, chest
radiographs are important in
checking for visible tumor spread.
If there is already visible tumor
spread at diagnosis, this changes
what treatments are
recommended. Some specialists
recommend nuclear imaging of the
skeleton to identify any spread to
other bones, which might also alter recommendations; however, this form of imaging is not
readily available.
What if it isn’t Really an Osteosarcoma?
The location and radiographic appearance of the osteosarcoma in the limb are quite
classic but there are a few outside possibilities that should at least be mentioned. Only a
few other possible conditions cause similar lesions in bone: the chondrosarcoma, the
squamous cell carcinoma, the synovial cell sarcoma, or fungal bone infection.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Chondrosarcoma
Chondrosarcoma is a cartilage tumor, possibly not as malignant as the osteosarcoma.
The chondrosarcoma generally occurs on flat bones such as ribs or skull bones and is not
usually found in the limbs. Still, should a chondrosarcoma occur in the limb, treatment
recommendations still include amputation of the affected bone and many of the same
treatments as for osteosarcoma.
Squamous Cell Carcinoma
The squamous cell carcinoma is a tumor of the external coating of the bone, called the
periosteum. This is a destructive tumor locally but it tends to spread relatively slowly.
Again, a bone suspected of malignant tumor should be amputated, and the tissue then
analyzed and then treatment adjustments should be made thereafter. The squamous cell
carcinoma tends not to arise in the same bone areas as the osteosarcoma; it tends to
arise in the jaw bones or in the toe bones.
Synovial Cell SarcomaThis is a tumor of the joint capsule lining. Its hallmark is that it
affects both bones of the joint. The osteosarcoma, no matter how large or destructive it
becomes, will never cross over to an adjacent bone. Prognosis is much better with
amputation with synovial cell sarcoma.
Fungal Bone Infection
Coccidiodes immitis is a fungus native to the lower Sonoran life zone of the southwestern
United States. It is the infectious agent of the disease called San Joaquin Valley Fever or
just Valley Fever. (More scientifically, the condition is called coccidioidomycosis.) In most
cases, infection is limited to a few calcified lymph nodes in the chest and possibly lung
disease. In some rare cases, though, the fungus disseminated through the body and can
cause a very proliferative bone infection. The bone infection of coccidiodomycosis grows
rapidly and lacks the lytic lesions that are typical of the osteosarcoma. Other fungi, such
as Histoplasma capsulatum, also have potential for bone involvement. Pursuit of this
possibility makes sense if you live in an area where these fungi are a concern.
Disseminated fungal disease is serious and even though this diagnosis is not cancerous,
amputating the limb is most likely going to be necessary.
Treatment of osteosarcoma involves two aspects: treating the pain and fighting
the cancer’s spread.
How do we Treat the Pain?
Keep in mind that dogs are usually euthanized because of the pain in the affected bone.
Treating the pain successfully will allow a dog to live comfortably and extend life
expectancy by virtue of extending comfort. There are two ways to address the pain:
amputatating the limb and palliative radiotherapy (usually combined with periodic
bisphosphonate infusion treatments).
For most patients, there is one tumor on a leg and no visible tumor spread in the lungs.
These are the patients with the best potential results and they are good candidates for
amputation. Patients with a lot of arthritis in the other legs or with tumor spread evident in
the chest already are probably not candidates for amputation and it may be more
appropriate to keep the leg and simply relieve the pain with radiotherapy.
Amputating the Limb
Since the tumor in the limb is the source of pain, it makes sense that amputating the limb
would resolve the pain. In fact, this is true. Removing the affected limb resolves the pain in
100 percent of cases. Unfortunately, many people are reluctant to have this procedure
performed because of misconceptions.
While losing a leg is handicapping to a human, losing one leg out of four does
not restrict a dog's activity level. Running and playing are not inhibited by

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 3/7
amputation after recovery from surgery. That said, if the remaining legs are
arthritic, the stress on them can pose a mobility issue.
While losing a limb is disfiguring to a human and has social ramifications, dogs
are not self-conscious about their image. The dog will not feel disfigured by the
surgery; it is the owner that will need to adjust to the dog’s new appearance.
Median survival time for dogs who do not receive chemotherapy for
osteosarcoma is 3 to 5 months from the time of diagnosis regardless of
whether or not they have amputation. Do you want your dog's last 3 to 5
months to be painful or comfortable?
Read a letter about amputation from a veterinarian who sees too many owners who reject
the option of amputation out of hand. His letter includes videos of two happy dogs without
limbs.
Limb-sparing Surgery (removing the tumor but not the leg)
Limb-sparing techniques developed for humans have been adapted for dogs. To spare the
limb and thus avoid amputation, the tumorous bone is removed and either replaced by a
bone graft from a bone bank or the remaining bone can be re-grown via a new technique
called bone transport osteogenesis. The joint nearest the tumor is fused (i.e., fixed in one
position and cannot be flexed or extended.)
Limb sparing cannot be done if more than 50% of the bone is involved by tumor
or if neighboring muscle is involved.
Limb sparing does not work well for hind legs or tumors of the humerus (arm
bone.)
Limb sparing works best for tumors of the distal radius (forearm bone).
Complications of limb sparing can include: Bone infection, implant failure, tumor
recurrence, and fracture.
While amputation can be viewed as a pain management strategy, limb-sparing is only
performed in conjunction with chemotherapy. It is important to keep in mind that grafting of
a new bone structure requires healing time and that a great deal of post-operative
confinement time is needed (in a patient whose life expectancy is going to be measured in
months). For the right patient, limb-sparing can be the best choice but be sure to
understand all the details of post-operative care from the specialist.
Palliative Radiotherapy for Pain Control
Sometimes amputation is simply not the right choice and happily there is an effective
alternative treatment. Radiation can be applied to the tumor in two, three or four doses,
depending on the protocol. Improved limb function is usually evident within the first 3
weeks and typically lasts 2 to 4 months. When pain returns, radiation can be given again
for further pain relief if deemed appropriate based on the stage of the cancer at that time.
There are a couple of caveats:
When pain is relieved in the tumorous limb, there is an increase in activity that
can in turn lead to a pathologic fracture of the bone.
Radiotherapy does not produce a helpful response in about 1/4 of patients.
Remember, amputation controls pain in 100 percent of cases but if amputation
is simply not an option, there is a 3 out of 4 chance that radiotherapy will
control the pain.
Current standard treatment involves pairing palliative radiation with monthly infusions of
medications called bisphosphonates.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 4/7
Bisphosphonates
This class of drug has become the standard of care in humans with bone tumors and have
been found helpful in managing osteosarcoma pain in dogs as well. Bisphosphonates act
by inhibiting bone destruction, which in turn helps control the pain and bone damage
caused by the bone tumor. The most common bisphosphonate in use for dogs has been
pamidronate, though a new drug zoledronate is taking its place gradually. Treatment is
given as an IV drip over two hours in the hospital every 3 to 4 weeks. In humans, an
assortment of potential side effects have emerged (fever, muscle pain, nausea all lasting 1
to 2 days in up to 25 percent of patients, renal disease in certain situations, low blood
calcium levels, jaw bone cell death); these issues so far have not panned out as problems
for dogs and cats. Bisphosphonates are important in managing bone tumor pain in
patients that have no undergone amputation.
Analgesic Drugs
At this time there are numerous analgesic medications available for dogs with this tumor.
No single medication, however, is a match for the pain involved in what amounts to a
slowly exploding bone. A combination of medications is needed to be reasonably palliative
and should be considered only as a last resort if amputation or radiation therapy will not
be pursued. There are several types of drugs that can be combined.
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs)
These are anti-inflammatory pain relievers developed for dogs: carprofen,
etodolac, deracoxib, meloxicam, firocoxib, and others. These are typically given
once or twice daily in tablet form at home. The patient should have good liver
and kidney function in order to take medications of this class.
Narcotic Pain Relievers
While these drugs do not have anti-inflammatory properties, they are wellknown analgesics and have been used in an assortment of forms for thousands
of years. They are particularly useful in chronic pain because they do not
interact negatively with other pain relievers. Drowsiness is a potential side
effect.
Miscellaneous Supplemental Pain Relievers
There are two drugs that have surfaced as adjunct pain relievers for animals
with chronic pain: gabapentin and amantadine. Gabapentin works on neurologic
pain and is rapidly surfacing in the treatment of arthritis, surgical pain, and
other chronic pain states. Amantadine works by reducing what is called wind
up, a phenomenon where nerves become sensitized to pain leading to the
experience of pain from stimuli that normally do not cause pain.
These different drugs are often given together to create analgesia to the osteosarcoma
patient when amputation and radiotherapy are not going to happen. It is important to
realize that there is a limit to how much pain relief can be achieved against a bone tumor
with only pills. It will not be long before the pain of this tumor, as evidenced by not using
the leg, tenderness to the touch, etc., overpowers the effect of oral medications.
How do we Treat the Cancer?
Osteosarcoma is unfortunately a fast-spreading tumor. By the time the tumor is found, it
is considered to have already spread. Osteosarcoma spreads to the lung in a malignant
process called metastasis. Prognosis is substantially worse if the tumor spread is visible
on chest radiographs, so if you are contemplating chemotherapy, chest radiographs
should be taken.
Chemotherapy is the only meaningful way to alter the course of this cancer.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Young dogs with osteosarcoma tend to have shorter survival times and more
aggressive disease than older dogs with osteosarcoma.
Elevations of alkaline phosphatase, one of the enzymes screened on a basic
blood panel, bode poorly. These dogs have approximately 50% of the survival
times quoted below for each protocol.
A tumor in the lymph nodes local to the leg being amputated also bodes poorly.
In the study by Hillers et. al published in the April 15th, 2005 issue of the
Journal of the AVMA, median survival was significantly longer (318 days vs. 59
days) in dogs where the tumor was not evident in local lymph nodes at the time
of amputation.
Cisplatin (given by IV every 3 to 4 weeks for 3 treatments)
The median survival time with this therapy is 400 days.
 Survival at 1 year: 30% to 60%
 Survival at 2 years: 7% to 21%
 Giving less than 3 doses does not increase survival time (i.e., if one can only
afford one or two treatments, it is not worth the expense of therapy)
 Cisplatin can be toxic to the kidneys and should not be used in animals with
pre-existing kidney disease.
Carboplatin (given by IV every 3 to 4 weeks for 4 treatments)
 Similar statistics to cisplatin but carboplatin is not toxic to the kidneys and can
be used if the patient has pre-existing kidney disease.
 Carboplatin is substantially more expensive than cisplatin.
Doxorubicin (given IV every 2 weeks for 5 treatments)
The median survival time is 365 days.
 10% still alive at 2 years.
Toxic to the heart. An ultrasound examination is needed prior to using this
drug as it should not be given to patients with reduced heart contracting ability.
Doxorubicin and Cisplatin in Combination (both given IV together every 3 weeks for
four treatments)
 48% survival at 1 year
 30% survival at 2 years
 16% survival at 3 years.
What is Median Survival Time?
There are a number of ways to statistically evaluate the central tendency of a group. The
median is the value at which 50% of the group falls above and 50% of the group falls
below. This is a little different from the average of the group, though more people are
familiar with this term. When evaluating median survival times, you are looking at a 50%
chance of surviving longer than the median and a 50% chance of surviving less than the
median.
What Does Chemotherapy Put my Dog Through?
Most people have an image of the chemotherapy patient either through experience or the
media and this image typically includes lots of weakness, nausea, and hair loss. In fact,
the animal experience in chemotherapy is not nearly as dramatic. After the pet has a
treatment, expect 1 to 2 days of lethargy and nausea. This is often substantially helped
with medications like Zofran, a strong anti-nausea drug commonly used in chemotherapy
patients. These side effects are worse if a combination of drugs is used but the pet is

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 6/7
typically back to normal by the third day after treatment. Effectively, you are trading 8 days
of sickness for 6 to 12 months of quality life. Hair loss is not usually a feature of animal
chemotherapy. In dogs, hair loss may occur in breeds that have continuously growing
coats, such as poodles, Scottish terriers, and Westies.
Axial Osteosarcoma
While osteosarcoma of the limbs is the classical form of this disease, osteosarcoma can
develop anywhere there is bone. "Axial" osteosarcoma is the term for osteosarcoma
originating in bones other than limb bones, with the most common affected bones being
the jaws (both lower and upper). Victims of the axial form of osteosarcoma tend to be
smaller, middle-aged, and females outnumber males two to one.
In the axial skeleton the tumor does not grow rapidly as do the appendicular tumors, thus
leading to a more insidious course of disease. The tumor may be there for as long as two
years before it is formally diagnosed. An exception is osteosarcoma of the rib, which tends
to be more aggressive than other axial osteosarcomas.
Treatment for axial osteosarcoma is similar to that for the appendicular form: surgery
followed by chemotherapy. There is one exception, that being osteosarcoma of the lower
jaw. Because of the slower growth of the axial tumor and the ability to remove part or all of
the jaw bone with little loss of function or cosmetic disfigurement, it has been reported that
71% of cases survived one year or longer with no chemotherapy at all.
Additional information can be found at Bone Cancer Dogs, Inc., a nonprofit corporation.
Not all veterinarians are comfortable treating osteosarcoma. Discuss with your
veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would be best for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951687&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154591
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:39 PM Osteosarcoma in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951687&ind=57&objTypeID=1007 7/7
Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's Disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 05, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
As you probably know at this stage, most
Cushing's disease is caused by a pituitary
tumor that is over-secreting its hormonal
messages to the adrenal glands and
causing all the excess stimulation that
leads to all the symptoms of Cushing's
disease.
Most pituitary tumors responsible for
Cushing’s disease are so small that their
size is insignificant and we can
concentrate on their hormone-producing
issues only. In other words, it doesn't
matter that the pituitary gland (and its
tumor) is located at the base of the brain
deep inside the skull as long as the tumor
is very small; we can just worry about the
hormones it produces and never mind its
location.
Approximately 10-20% of dogs with
pituitary dependent Cushing’s disease
have a tumor that actually is large enough
to take up a meaningful amount of space, unfortunately. These tumors are called
"macrotumors" and since there is not much extra space within the skull for extra
structures, a macrotumor can compress normal brain tissue and lead to neurologic
disease. Further, a pituitary tumor may not be macro at the time Cushing's disease is first
diagnosed but may grow to become macro over the years to come. It is thus a good idea
to become familiar with signs to watch for and even better to have periodic brain imaging
to check the tumor's changing size.
How Big is too Big?
Ten millimeters (about half of an inch) is the size a pituitary tumor must reach to be
categorized as a macrotumor in a human being. Dogs obviously have more variance in
the size and shape of their skulls than do people thus it may be inaccurate to use the
human definition for dogs but, so far, the veterinary profession has adopted the human
description. It appears that up to 50% of dogs with pituitary tumors of this size do not have
concurrent neurologic disease. We do not have information regarding how many of these
asymptomatic dogs will go on to develop neurologic disease nor do we have rules for
smaller dogs with smaller brains. Still, when a dog has a pituitary tumor of 10 mm in
diameter and neurologic signs, the tumor should be considered the cause of the signs. In
fact, the University of California Davis School of Veterinary Medicine is using 8 mm as
their cut-off size for recommending treatment.

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951513&ind=58&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Image Courtesy of Wendy Brooks, DVM
Is this Cancer?
Not in the way most people think
of cancer. Pituitary macrotumors
are almost always benign in that
they do not spread in any way.
They can, however, produce harm
simply because of their size and
location.
When Would an Owner Suspect a
Pituitary Macrotumor?
When a pituitary mass begins to
expand, the owner is likely to
notice subtle changes in behavior
though nothing may be obvious
even with a formal physical
examination. The dog may seem
just off, listless or may develop a
poor appetite. Occasionally signs
are more blatantly abnormal
(walking in circles or seizures) but
the subtle start is more common. It should be noted in particular that it is extremely
abnormal for a dog with Cushing's disease not to have a good appetite even while on
therapy. If a dog with Cushing's disease develops a poor appetite, they should be seen by
the veterinarian promptly.
Most dogs diagnosed with pituitary macroadenomas have been diagnosed with Cushing’s
disease at least 6 months prior and are probably well controlled on medication, so this
condition tends to appear out of the blue in an otherwise normal dog. In this situation, a
macrotumor must be considered, especially if fresh blood testing does not reveal any new
diseases. Of course, blatant neurologic signs in a dog with Cushing’s disease would
definitely be suspicious for a pituitary macrotumor as well.
Brachycephalic breeds (boxers, pugs etc.) tend to have the biggest pituitary tumors.
How is Diagnosis Confirmed?
Imaging of the brain is required to confirm a pituitary macrotumor and this means either
CT (CAT scan) or MRI (magnetic resonance imaging). These procedures are expensive;
for example, in Los Angeles brain imaging can easily cost a couple of thousand
dollars. Special facilities are needed for the equipment involved, and referral to a specialty
hospital is usually required. MRI is felt to be superior for imaging the pituitary gland and is
the preferred imaging method for this situation; however, CT is more readily available.
Both these imaging procedures are performed under general anesthesia and involve
some risks. The equipment used is large and the patient must spend a good eight to 10
minutes without monitoring inside the equipment. Since MRI uses powerful magnets,
normal anesthetic machines cannot be used (because they are metal) and injectable
anesthetics are often needed. Injectable anesthesia is not as easily controlled as
inhalation.
At this time there is no blood test that can distinguish a macrotumor from a microtumor,
but some promising tests are currently under investigation.
How is a Pituitary Macrotumor Treated?
While surgical removal of pituitary tumors is feasible in humans, the pituitary area is not
nearly as accessible surgically in dogs.

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951513&ind=58&objTypeID=1007 2/4
This means that radiation therapy is the only effective treatment available for pituitary
macro tumors.
Radiation therapy is performed usually two to three times weekly for four to six weeks and
is an expensive undertaking of several thousand dollars. Of dogs that receive radiation
therapy, 70 percent will have good improvement as a result with half of them having rapid
improvement and the other half improving in the month or two following the course of
therapy.
Radiation therapy is not without complication. Common problems associated with this
treatment include loss of pigment in the skin and hair in the area irradiated, hearing loss,
and sometimes problems with tear production in the eyes.
Many dogs experience a resolution of their Cushing’s disease if the pituitary tumor
responds well, but one should plan to have to continue treatment for Cushing’s disease
despite radiation as at least 50 percent still require treatment for their Cushing's disease.
Very large tumors (greater than 25 mm in diameter) tend to be too big to respond. For this
reason, early detection of the tumor is best and allows for more successful radiation
therapy.
Is Radiation Therapy Likely to be Curative?
Unfortunately, no. The pituitary tumor is likely to recur in time (ranges are reported at 2.5
to 26 months for recurrence). Keep in mind that these patients are geriatric and might not
live long enough to see their tumor recur. For more details, see the results of the
Theon/Feldman study below.
Should all Dogs with Pituitary Cushing’s Disease be Imaged to Potentially Catch the Tumor
Early?
This is a difficult question to answer; there are arguments either way. Imaging is not
without risk since it involves general anesthesia and Cushing's disease patients are
generally elderly. Further, imaging is expensive and there is only a 10 to 20 percent
chance of finding a tumor big enough to warrant therapy. By the time it has been
determined that a dog has Cushing's disease, many owners are tired of the seemingly
endless progression of testing and associated expense.
On the other hand, imaging early will identify dogs at risk for the development of a
macrotumor. For example, a dog with a small tumor (less than 4 mm in diameter) at the
time of Cushing's diagnosis is unlikely to live long enough for that tumor to quadruple in
size to a tumor large enough to warrant attention. A dog with a larger tumor (say, 7 mm in
diameter) could easily have a tumor of significant size in a year or two and such a patient
should be re-imaged in 12 to 16 months to re-evaluate the tumor size. A tumor 10 mm in
diameter at the time of the diagnosis of Cushing's disease is probably large enough to
warrant radiotherapy right off the bat even if no signs are yet seen. If this last patient is not
imaged at the beginning, it is likely that the tumor will not be treatable when it is big
enough to create more obvious symptoms.
A dog with an initial tumor size greater than 10 mm in diameter has a 66 percent chance
of developing clinical signs directly attributable to the macro tumor.
At this time, universities recommend brain imaging on all dogs with pituitarydependent Cushing's disease if possible. UC Davis recommends that any tumor 8
mm in diameter or larger be irradiated and that smaller masses be re-imaged in
12 to 14 months.
Results of the Theon/Feldman Study

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951513&ind=58&objTypeID=1007 3/4
(Theon, A.P. and Feldman E.C. Megavoltage irradiation of pituitary macrotumors in dogs
with neurologic signs. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association, Vol 213,
No 2, July 15, 1998.)
Overall survival was increased in macrotumor patients with radiotherapy. The average
survival time was approximately five months from the time neurologic problems had
started (patients without neurologic problems were not included in this study). Out of 24
dogs in the study, seven survived longer than one year from the time of tumor diagnosis. If
neurologic problems were categorized as severe (i.e. there was a compromised ability to
walk), survival time was not improved by radiotherapy. Milder neurologic deficits were
associated with longer survival.
In this study, both dogs with ACTH-secreting tumors (the kind that cause Cushing’s
disease) and pituitary tumors that were hormonally inactive (the kind that do not cause
Cushing’s disease) were studied. The dogs with ACTH-secreting tumors had better
responses to radiotherapy than those with inactive tumors; however, in these patients,
radiotherapy yielded a better chance of resolving neurologic problems than it did in
resolving the symptoms of Cushing's disease.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951513&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154619
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951513&ind=58&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Photo Courtesy Deposit Photos
Prostate Cancer in Dogs
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: September 18, 2019
In male dogs, the prostate is a gland that produces
nutrients to help sperm survive once inside the
female’s reproductive tract. The prostate gland
surrounds the opening of his urinary bladder, which
collects urine, as well as the urethra, a tube-like
structure that sends urine from the bladder to outside
the body.
Cancer Types
Within the prostate gland, cancer is rare, occurring in
only about 0.3-0.6% of dogs. Cancer can originate in
the prostate gland itself, which is called primary
prostate cancer, or from another organ that spread, or
metastasized, to the prostate. Most primary prostate
cancers are aggressive and highly metastatic cancers.
This means that they damage the tissues and grow
and spread quite quickly. Prostatic adenocarcinoma is
the most common type of primary cancer in the canine
prostate.
Benign, or noncancerous tumors (e.g. leiomyoma),
can occur in the prostate, but these are rare. Cancers
that have spread from elsewhere in the body are also
uncommon but can include lymphoma, which is associated with the immune system, and
transitional cell carcinoma, a common cancer found in and around the bladder.
Causes of Prostate Cancer
Researchers have not been able to discover the cause of prostate cancer. Some research
studies have suggested that neutered dogs are more likely to develop prostate cancer
than un-neutered (i.e. intact) dogs. This finding does not necessarily mean that neutering
causes the cancer. Neutered dogs tend to have a longer lifespan and receive better
veterinary care, so it’s possible that intact dogs could develop prostate cancer equally
under different conditions. Of course, plenty of intact male dogs are well-cared for and life
long and happy lives, so many more research studies are needed to prove this theory one
way or the other. What is important about this information is that both neutered and unneutered dogs can get prostate cancer.
Symptoms
Symptoms may include urinating only small amounts at a time; urinating more often than
usual; and/or straining to urinate (trying to go without success). The urine may be dark
brown or blood-tinged. Blood may drip from the penis. If the prostate is enlarged, it could

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Prostate Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284672&ind=59&objTypeID=1007 1/3
be pressing on the colon, which collects feces (poop), making it difficult for him to poop.
You may notice that your dog positions himself to defecate more frequently or takes a long
time to poop.
Sometimes the symptoms are less obvious. You may notice that your dog is losing weight
or appears thinner. He may eat less or skip multiple meals. He may also lay around more
or have trouble walking. In early stages of prostate cancer, your dog may not show any
symptoms at all.
Diagnosis
If you suspect your dog has prostate cancer, he will need a thorough physical examination
by a veterinarian. The vet will assess his overall health, feel his stomach to check for pain
and abnormal structures, and perform a rectal examination to feel the prostate gland and
any enlarged lymph nodes that could indicate cancer.
X-rays will likely be a next step to check the size of the prostate and look for any other
abnormalities such as signs of cancer spread. An abdominal ultrasound will allow the vet
to see how the prostate looks and give a better impression of the cancer’s effects on the
surrounding organs. Lab work may also be taken to ensure your dog’s internal organs are
all working properly and that no changes have occurred.
A biopsy (i.e. or removal of a tissue sample) of the prostate is the only sure way to confirm
that an abnormal prostate is cancerous. Not all enlarged or abnormal prostates are
cancer. A veterinary pathologist will look at the cells from the tissue sample to diagnosis
the cancer.
Treatment Options
Unfortunately, few effective treatment options for dogs with prostate cancer are available.
Surgery is not always helpful because the cancer has often spread by the time it is
discovered. Postoperative complications from surgery are often problematic for dogs and
can include trouble holding urine (urinary incontinence) and narrowing of the urethra to the
point of being unable to urinate. Radiation tends to damage the surrounding tissues too
much to be useful in most cases. Most chemotherapy drugs and protocols have not been
shown to increase a dog’s lifespan.
If your dog is diagnosed with prostate cancer, palliative or supportive care can help keep
your pet comfortable. Canine nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) can
decrease pain and may also have an anti-cancer effect on prostate cancer. Antibiotics
may be needed if urinary tract or prostate infections occur secondary to the cancer. If the
prostate becomes large enough to prevent urinating, surgery to enlarge the urethral
opening or create a different direction of urine flow may be needed. Quality of Life
evaluation and end of life decisions should also be discussed with your veterinarian.
Luckily, prostate cancer is rare. Routine veterinary check-ups and physical examinations
may lead to finding prostate cancer early. If your pet is showing any unusual signs or
symptoms, always call your vet’s office for their advice and/or to schedule a check-up.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9284672&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154642
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Prostate Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284672&ind=59&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:40 PM Prostate Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284672&ind=59&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Illustration courtesy MarVistaVet
Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 31, 2024
Published: March 05, 2003
What is the Spleen for?
The spleen is an oblong organ
(some would say it is tongueshaped) seated just below the
stomach. Its consistency is
similar to that of the liver. While
your dog can live perfectly well
without a spleen, the spleen
does provide some helpful
services to the body.
Nature's Blood Bank
The spleen contains many long,
narrow blood vessels that are full
of hairpin turns through which
circulating red blood cells must
go. This means that there are a lot of red blood cells working their way gradually through
the spleen at any given time, effectively making the spleen a storage area for blood. If one
has a severe hemorrhage and needs extra blood, the involuntary muscles of the spleen
contract, squirting forth a fresh supply of blood. The spleen provides nature’s blood
transfusion, if you will.
Removing old Brittle Red Blood Cells
Older red blood cells become more brittle than their younger counterparts. As they attempt
the tortuous route through the spleen, many older red cells do not make it out the other
side. These cells rupture while trying to make the tight turns, and their iron is captured and
recycled by the spleen. Thus, the spleen helps remove old red blood cells from circulation,
which is sort of a clean-up function.
Removing Infected Red Blood Cells
The spleen also performs a function called pitting where it is able to bite off sections of the
red blood cells passing through. Antibodies made by the immune system can coat
suspicious portions of a red blood cell, thereby marking the area for "pitting." These
suspicious areas are bitten off or "pitted" by cells of the spleen.
In this way, the spleen can remove red blood cell parasites from the circulating red blood
cells, helping keep cells functioning that otherwise might become irreparably damaged if
their infection is allowed to persist. Sometimes entire red cells are removed from the
circulation in this way, thus preventing the spread of the red cell parasite inside. This
sounds like a good thing, but it can get out of hand. For example, in feline infectious
anemia, the spleen commonly removes so many red blood cell portions that the infection

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951872&ind=60&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Spleen illustration
Illustration courtesy Dr. Wendy Brooks
is difficult to detect, plus the patient becomes dangerously anemic (not from the actual
parasite but because the spleen removed large numbers of infected red blood cells). In
severe cases of this condition, the spleen may have to be removed.
Part of the Lymphatic System
The above functions take place in what is
called the red pulp of the spleen. The spleen
also contains what is called white pulp,
which is essentially part of the lymphatic
system, sort of like a lymph node. It serves
the same functions as a lymph node but is
connected through the circulatory system.
Lymph nodes are centers of activity for the
immune system, especially antibodyproducing lymphocytes. Material from the
local area of the body drains to the lymph
node via the lymph vessels and the
lymphocytes may or may not become
stimulated into reacting depending on what sort of material is collected.
A reactive lymph node enlarges (the obvious example is the submandibular nodes that
swell when you have a sore throat). The white pulp of the spleen sees material from the
circulatory system rather than material from the local lymphatics. Lymphocytes circulate
through the splenic white pulp just as they do through the lymphatic vessels, carrying
messages involved in the war against body invaders (bacteria, viruses, etc.).
Why are Splenic Masses Bad?
Most spleens are removed because they have grown a tumor. Tumors can be benign (like
the red pulp hemangioma) or malignant (like the red pulp hemangiosarcoma, white pulp
mast cell tumor, or white pulp lymphosarcoma). In dogs, most splenic masses are either
hemangiomas or hemangiosarcomas, while in cats, they are usually either mast cell
tumors or lymphosarcomas.
Hemangioma and Hemangiosarcoma: The Most Common Canine Splenic Tumors
Both these tumors arise from the blood vessels of the red pulp and amount to a bunch of
wildly proliferating abnormal blood vessels. Eventually, the growth ruptures, and the
spleen bleeds. When a vascular organ like the spleen bleeds, a life-threatening blood loss
can result.
Usually the patient is suddenly weak.
The patient may be obviously cold.
The gums will be pale in color.
If the bleed stops on its own, the patient will be dramatically better the next day
or even a few hours later.
Unfortunately, the splenic mass is certain to bleed again, and if the spleen is not removed,
eventually, the patient will bleed to death.
If the splenic tumor is benign, removing the spleen is curative, provided that the patient
has not lost too much blood to survive the surgery. Ideally, the mass is detected before it
has ever bled, and the spleen is removed at a time when the mass is not actively
bleeding. Of course, if the splenic mass IS actively bleeding and cannot be stopped with
pressure wraps, removing it becomes an emergency surgery; it is not appropriate to try to
wait until the bleeding has stopped. Expect blood transfusions to be necessary before,
during, and possibly after surgery.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951872&ind=60&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Radiograph courtesy MarVistaVet
If the splenic tumor is a malignant hemangiosarcoma, the spleen can still be removed to
control the bleeding, but the problem is that hemangiosarcoma is an aggressive cancer.
By removing the spleen and primary tumor, the patient is probably spared bleeding to
death, only to eventually succumb to cancer. Since the decision to go to surgery often
hinges on whether or not the tumor is malignant, some effort should be made to make this
determination if delaying the surgery can be safely done. Chest radiographs and
abdominal ultrasound look for evidence of tumor spread.
If there is evidence of tumor spread, the tumor is malignant, and the best control entails
removing the spleen and following up with chemotherapy. Many people opt for euthanasia
at this point, though newer drugs have held promise.
If there is no evidence of tumor spread, it may be possible to effect a permanent cure by
removing the spleen, although lack of visible tumor spread does not mean the tumor is
benign. A piece of spleen tissue for biopsy will be needed to settle the question of
malignancy.
How Are Splenic Masses Detected?
There are several ways to detect a splenic mass.
The first way is by physical examination. A large
firm mass in the area of the spleen may be felt
with the hands during a routine physical
examination. From there, radiographs of the
belly see if the mass appears to be on the
spleen, and chest radiographs see if there is
evidence of cancer spread. Based on these
findings, plus basic blood work, a decision for or
against spleen removal can be made.
Unfortunately, many large dogs are simply too
well-muscled for splenic masses to be detected
in this way.
Another method of detecting a splenic tumor
comes from the basic blood panel. An unexplained responsive anemia is discovered. A
responsive anemia is typical of bleeding (as opposed to an anemia of chronic disease
where red blood cells simply are inadequately produced). An older large breed dog with
an unexplained bleed is highly suggestive of a splenic tumor. The next step would be
radiographs to see if a mass is apparent, followed by chest radiographs for tumor spread
as above. These findings on the blood panel are especially suggestive of a splenic mass if
there has been a history of sudden weakness or collapse typical of a recent bleed. Splenic
tumors tend to bleed intermittently (and usually insignificantly) prior to a large bleed that
produces obvious symptoms. These smaller bleeds are generally enough to alter the
blood panel. If blood work is suggestive of a splenic mass, radiographs can be taken to
confirm a mass.
It can be difficult to determine from the radiograph if the mass is coming from the liver or
from the spleen.
Choosing Not to Remove the Spleen
Unfortunately, eventually, the dog will have a bleed from which he cannot recover. If you
think your dog is having a bleed at home, you can apply an ace bandage around the belly
in a snug manner to essentially apply pressure to the bleed. This is surprisingly effective
and may stave off the inevitable temporarily or until you can get your dog to an emergency
hospital for more definitive support, such as a blood transfusion. A Chinese herb called
Yunnan Baiyo can assist in blood clotting and may be helpful in minimizing the severity of
future bleeds.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951872&ind=60&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Chemotherapy may still be an option even if the spleen and its malignant tumor are left
behind. A newer approach to chemotherapy, metronomic chemotherapy, focuses on
eliminating the tumor's blood supply rather than on killing it directly. Lower doses of
chemotherapy drugs are used, which leads to far less potential for side effects. If this is
something you are considering, consult an oncologist for the most up-to-date information.
Other Reasons to Remove the Spleen
We have already mentioned the splenic mass as well as excessive red blood cell removal
by the spleen as reasons for splenectomy. There are some other situations where
splenectomy may be needed.
Bloat (Gastric Dilatation and Volvulus)
In this condition, the stomach bloats with gas and twists on its axis, effectively cutting off
its circulation. This is a huge emergency, usually requiring surgery. The issue with the
spleen is that it rides just below the stomach so that when the stomach twists, the spleen
twists along with it. Frequently, the spleen, or part of it, must be removed.
Traumatic Rupture of the Spleen
If the patient suffers blunt trauma to the abdomen, such as getting kicked by livestock or
being hit by a car, the spleen may rupture and bleed dangerously. If a tear in the spleen is
small, it may be repaired (sewn together), but if the rupture is severe, it may be easiest to
simply remove the whole spleen.
Splenectomy
The spleen may begin bleeding at any time up until it is actually removed. If this occurs, a
blood transfusion is likely going to be needed, either with artificial blood or whole blood,
depending on what is available. It is possible that multiple transfusions will be needed. A
parameter called the “PCV” (“packed cell volume”) or "hematocrit" will be monitored to
ensure that the amount of circulating red blood cells does not fall dangerously low. Ideally,
the spleen will not be bleeding at any time during surgery.
Some patients must receive blood transfusions prior to splenectomy to ensure they have a
reserve of red blood cells in case of surgical bleeding. It may not be known prior to
surgery if the tumor is benign or malignant, particularly if there was no time to have an
ultrasound before surgery. There is a fair chance that malignancy will be immediately
obvious once the belly is opened. Some issues to understand are:
The most common complication of splenectomy is hemorrhage
(bleeding). Be prepared for blood transfusion(s) to be needed.
The spleen is supplied by numerous blood vessels that must be tied off or
sealed in order for the spleen to be removed.
If the tumor is obviously malignant, will you want your dog euthanized at that
point? Will you want the spleen removed so that you can consider
chemotherapy? Will you want the incision simply closed and your dog
awakened? Ideally, depending on the stability of your pet, it may be good for
you to take the time to answer these questions prior to surgery so that your
veterinarian will know what to do should this situation arise. Sadly, not every pet
bleeding from the spleen is stable enough to make this a long discussion.
The dog having a splenectomy because of a splenic mass will appear
substantially thinner after surgery. There will be a long incision to accommodate
this large organ and perhaps a bandage to control any leaking of blood from

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951872&ind=60&objTypeID=1007 4/5
the incision.
Most dogs go home a day or two after surgery. An iron supplement may be
needed to help the body recover from any blood loss. Antibiotics will likely be
prescribed as will some sort of pain relief for the recovery period.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951872&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154671
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Splenic Masses in Dogs (Splenectomy) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951872&ind=60&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Testicular Cancer in Dogs
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Revised: April 13, 2023
Published: September 18, 2019
Testicular tumors are the most common
genital tumors found in male dogs. Tumors
can grow in one or both testicles. Most types
of testicular tumors are malignant. Usually
this means that they are cancerous and
have the potential to spread and harmfully
change the surrounding tissues. Cancerous
tumors can also metastasize (spread) to
other organs throughout the body. The good
news is that although testicular cancer in
dogs is technically malignant, unlike other
types of malignant tumors, these tend to
occur at an older age (i.e. average 10 years
of age) and metastasis to other organs is rare.
Dogs can develop three main types of testicular cancer (although numerous uncommon
cancers can also occur): 1) seminoma, 2) Leydig or interstitial cell tumor, and 3)
Sertoli or sustentacular cell tumor. More than one of these three types can occur in one
cancerous testicle, and both testicles can be cancerous but have different types of
testicular cancer.
Clinical Signs
When a dog has testicular cancer, one of his testicles may look or feel abnormal. The
affected one may be larger than the normal testicle, or it may have a firm, sometimes
painful mass inside that you can feel. If both testicles are cancerous, they may both seem
larger than normal; the testicles may be painful; or there might be masses.
Some dogs appear to only have one testicle. This likely means that during puppyhood,
only one testicle descended or dropped normally, and the other testicle remained in his
abdomen or belly. This happenstance is known as cryptorchidism. Cancer of the
undescended or cryptorchid testicle is common but will not be obvious by just looking at
your pet. Sertoli cell tumors and seminomas are the most common types of testicular
cancer found in an undescended testicle.
Other signs of cancer can include weight loss, poor appetite, abdominal/belly pain, or a
mass in the belly. Some testicular cancers, such as Sertoli cell tumors, produce estrogen,
a hormone more commonly associated with female dogs. Dogs with testicular tumors that
produce estrogen may develop enlarged mammary glands or breast tissue; hair loss on
the dog’s trunk; or dark discoloration to the skin. In some cases, estrogen-producing
testicular tumors can also affect the bone marrow, resulting in low red blood cell, white
blood cell, and platelet counts. In such cases, pallor and acting tired from anemia,
excessive bleeding and bruising, and/or fever and infections may occur. Leydig cell

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Testicular Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284643&ind=61&objTypeID=1007 1/3
tumors can produce an excess amount of testosterone. In such cases, a dog may
develop swelling on his rear near his anus, which may be due to a hernia or enlargement
of the perianal glands surrounding the anus.
It is important to understand that initially many dogs will not show obvious signs. Also of
importance is that not all of the clinical signs described are specifically associated with
testicular cancer. Numerous other causes may be the culprit, so further testing may be
needed to determine why your dog is having such unusual changes.
What to do if you Suspect Testicular Cancer
If you think your dog might have testicular cancer, your regular veterinarian will perform a
physical examination and check over your dog’s testicles. A rectal examination will check
your dog’s prostate gland and feel for enlarged lymph nodes. Palpation or feeling
structures inside your dog’s abdomen is also common, as well as checking your dog’s
gums and listening to his heart and lungs.
If cancer is suspected, x-rays of the belly and chest may be needed to search for more
clues of cancer or spread to other organs. Lab work may be done to make sure your pet’s
internal organs are functioning correctly or to see what hormones are circulating in the
bloodstream. Sometimes an abdominal ultrasound will be needed to look for an
undescended testicle or organ metastasis.
Treating Testicular Cancer
Castration, or basic neutering, is the recommended treatment of choice. Both testicles
need to be removed because cancer may be present in both, even if only one is obviously
affected. If a pet is cryptorchid, intra-abdominal surgery will be needed to remove the
testicle in the abdomen as well as surgery to remove the normal one.
A pathologist can assess the testicles after they are removed to determine the type of
cancer. Sometimes chemotherapy or radiation can be performed, but the effectiveness will
depend on the type and severity of cancer. If your veterinarian is not comfortable treating
the type of cancer, you may be referred to a veterinary oncologist.
If no evidence of metastasis has occurred and the pet isn't displaying any major tumorrelated clinical signs, surgery is often the only treatment needed and your pet will be
cured. Only about 15% of testicular tumors metastasize, so the cure rate after surgery is
extremely high. Pets that are severely affected by testicular tumors, such as those with
bone marrow disease, have a much poorer prognosis. This means that even with surgery,
very sick pets may not survive. The sooner surgery can be performed after noticing
clinical signs or a change in the testicles, the better your pet’s chances of cure will be.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9284643&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154692
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Testicular Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284643&ind=61&objTypeID=1007 2/3

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Testicular Cancer in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=9284643&ind=61&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Normal urinary tract showing kidneys,
ureters, bladder, and urethra. This is
called a half shell view as if the tract
were opened vertically for viewing.
Illustration by Wendy Brooks
Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 03, 2025
Published: October 06, 2003
Transitional cell carcinoma (frequently abbreviated to
TCC) is a particularly unpleasant malignant tumor of the
urinary bladder. This tumor type is also sometimes called
urothelial carcinoma. In dogs, it usually arises in the
lower neck of the bladder, where it is virtually impossible
to surgically remove, and causes a partial or complete
obstruction to urination. The urethra (which carries urine
outside the body) is affected in over half the patients
diagnosed with TCC; the prostate gland of male animals
may also be involved. In cats, the site of the tumor within
the bladder is more variable, which means we are less
able to predict whether a mass is likely to be a benign
polyp or a malignant tumor based on its location. Bloody
urine and straining to urinate are typically the signs noted
by the owner, whether the patient is a dog or a cat. These
signs are, of course, exactly what would be expected in
the event of a bladder infection (which is frequently
present concurrently with the tumor), making diagnosis
somewhat challenging as both conditions produce similar
symptoms.
Why is this Tumor Called a Transitional Cell Carcinoma? Is
Something in Transition?
Epithelial cells are cells that line areas of the body that
interface with the outside environment. There are many
different types of epithelial cells depending on the
immediate environment they contact. The skin, for
example, is a barrier against irritants and wounds. The
tough cells that make up the skin are called squamous
epithelial cells because of their flat, overlapping, scalelike design that helps them form a barrier similar to the
shingles of a rooftop. The epithelial cells of the respiratory
tract secrete lubricant but also are designed to trap
inhaled particles in secreted mucus and use tiny hair-like
cilia to push them out of the lower tract and back upward,
where they can be coughed up. These are called ciliated
columnar epithelial cells.
The urinary bladder is lined by transitional epithelial cells.
They must protect the body from the caustic urine inside
the bladder, but also must maintain this barrier when the

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Urinary tract with a transitional cell
carcinoma growing in the bladder neck
and down the urethra. Illustration by
Wendy Brooks
bladder stretches and distends with larger volumes of
urine. Transitional cell carcinoma is a tumor of the
transitional epithelial cell lining of the urinary bladder.
While bladder tumors are somewhat rare as types of
cancers go in pets, more than half (and possibly up to 70%) of the bladder tumors
developed by pets are transitional cell carcinomas.
What Causes This Tumor?
As with most cancers, we do not know many specific causes. Presumably, repeated
exposure to carcinogens in the urine is an important cause. We know that chemotherapy
with cyclophosphamide is one cause. We know that female dogs tend to get more
transitional cell carcinomas than male dogs, possibly because females do less urine
marking and are thus possibly storing urinary toxins longer. In cats, however, males have
an increased risk compared to females. Urban living and obesity have been found to
increase the risk of the development of this tumor. We know that Shetland sheepdogs,
West Highland White terriers, Beagles, and Scottish terriers seem to be predisposed
breeds. Beyond this, specifics remain unknown.
A recent study showed that exposure to phenoxy herbicide-treated lawns increased the
risk of developing TCC in the Scottish terrier. Another study investigating TCC in Scottish
terriers found that the risk for the development of this tumor could be reduced by feeding
yellow/orange or green-leafy vegetables at least three times per week.
The average age at diagnosis in dogs is 11 years. The median age at diagnosis in
cats is 15 years.
What Kind of Testing is Needed to Identify this Tumor?
Bloody urine with straining can be caused by many other conditions besides cancer. A
severe bladder infection, a bladder stone, or feline lower urinary tract disease would be far
more common and must be explored first. In other words, reaching a diagnosis is a stepby-step procedure whereby the most common conditions are individually ruled out until a
diagnosis is confirmed.
First Step: Urinalysis and Culture
Many people are confused by the difference between these two tests. A urinalysis is an
analysis of urine including a brief chemical analysis and a microscopic examination of the
cells contained in the sample. A culture involves plating a sample of urine sediment on a
growth medium, incubating for bacterial growth, identifying any bacteria grown, and
determining what antibiotics are going to be effective.
Urinalysis and culture will rule in a bladder infection. (A documented infection absolutely
does not rule out a tumor, as tumors may easily become infected.)
About 30 percent of TCCs will shed tumor cells into the urine, which may be identified as
such during urinalysis.
If a bladder infection is present, it may be worthwhile to treat it with the appropriate
antibiotic and see if the clinical signs resolve. If signs do not resolve or if they promptly
recur, further testing is definitely in order.
Second Step
If no infection is found, if the urinalysis is normal despite obvious symptoms, if symptoms
do not resolve with treatment for infection, or if there is some other reason to be
suspicious of a continuing problem, imaging (usually radiographs or ultrasound) would be
the next step. A bladder stone would be a vastly more common scenario than a tumor, but

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Urine sediment cytology with cells consistent
with transitional cell carcinoma. Photo courtesy
of Dr. Delphine Reich.
Ultrasound image of a transitional cell carcinoma in a
dog's bladder neck. (Photo credit: DVMSound)
it may not be possible to rule out both of these with
one test. Radiography is generally less costly and
more available than ultrasound, but ultrasound
offers the ability to view soft tissue structures inside
the bladder, which radiography cannot. This means
that tumors are not visible to radiographs (though
most stones are) while both stones and tumors are
generally visible to ultrasound.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound uses sound waves to create an image of
structures within the urinary bladder. This presents a
non-invasive way to detect radiolucent stones,
polyps, or tumors within the bladder. If a growth is
found, it is tempting to sample the cells by needle
aspirate; however, the TCC is famous for seeding
other organs via needle track so it is best not to
attempt aspiration. Sampling is best done by
cystoscopy (see below). Ultrasound is helpful in
determining the extent of tumor spread after
diagnosis has been confirmed (see below).
Ultrasound is not available in all hospitals, and
sometimes referral is necessary.
Radiography
The main use of radiography at this point is to rule
out obvious bladder stones, as they are a common
cause of bloody urine and urinary straining. Stones
in the bladder provide an explanation for the
symptoms and the focus can be shifted to
managing stones (removing the stones and
preventing new ones from developing).
Because radiography cannot distinguish
urine from bladder tissue, plain radiographs
cannot show tumors without special contrast
agents. However, if stones are found, there
is usually no reason to look further.
A Newer Test for Dogs: The BRAF Mutation
Test
A non-invasive test for TCC has been
validated for dogs. It turns out that 85
percent of canine transitional cell
carcinomas have a specific mutation in a
gene called BRAF. This mutation can be
detected in a urine sample, sometimes well
before the tumor is visible via the special
imaging described. The BRAF test can be used to screen apparently normal dogs of an
at-risk breed or it can be used to investigate a dog with symptoms when there is a
question of a tumor. The test is not available for cats, and it requires 30 cc of urine (a
relatively large sample). Remember that 15 percent of dogs with TCC do not express this
BRAF mutation and will test negative. Many dogs with TCC that test negative on the
BRAF test can instead be identified with a different genetic test called BRAF-PLUS. This
test is also done on a urine sample. Between them, the two tests can detect about 95
percent of dogs with TCC. The BRAF and BRAF-PLUS tests make excellent

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 3/7
complementary tests if there is any ambiguity in the imaging. These tests are completely
different from the BLAT (bladder tumor antigen test), which was not very helpful as it was
not accurate in bloody urine.
Finding a mass in the neck of the bladder, even with inconclusive tissue samples,
is often all that is needed to diagnose transitional cell carcinoma.
Third Step
If an explanation for the patient's symptoms has still not been determined at this point,
specific imaging methods are needed to see inside the urinary bladder. This imaging can
be done with contrast radiography, where a special dye is injected into the bladder to
outline any solid material inside it. For a more detailed exploration, cystoscopy threads a
tiny camera through the urinary tract to view and possibly even biopsy the bladder wall. 
Other Techniques
A tissue sample, of course, is ideal for confirming the diagnosis and cystoscopy generally
requires referral. Sometimes a urinary catheter can be placed and manipulated in such a
way as to harvest cells through the tumor. A rectal examination sometimes reveals
swelling in the area of the urethra that would be highly suspicious of a transitional cell
carcinoma in a patient with consistent symptoms.
Fourth Step
So at this point, a growth in the bladder has been identified. If the patient is a dog and the
growth is in the bladder neck (and the BRAF mutation test is positive), this may be all the
doctor needs to know but if there is any question about the status of the growth (negative
BRAF Test, growth in an unusual bladder area, etc.), tissue sampling is needed to confirm
the diagnosis. Ultrasound guidance can assist with a needle aspirate of the growth, but
this is generally discouraged as the TCC is able to seed normal tissue with tumor as a
needle is passed through it. More appropriate ways to get a sample include traumatic
catheterization (where a sharp urinary catheter is passed and used to slice off or aspirate
a piece of the growth; surgery (where the bladder is opened up and tissue is removed for
evaluation); or cystoscopy (where a small camera is passed into the urinary tract and tiny
instruments can sample the growth). This last option requires a large enough urinary tract
opening to accommodate the equipment; male cats are not large enough.
Transitional Cell Carcinoma Has Been Diagnosed. Now What?
When your pet is diagnosed with cancer, most people want to know how long their pet has
to live and what treatments are available. Prognosis depends on the stage of the disease
(i.e., whether the tumor is invading other local organs, whether there is evidence of lymph
node spread, and whether there is evidence of distant tumor spread).
In one study, the median survival time was 118 days for dogs with evidence of tumor
invasion of other local organs compared with 218 days for dogs with no evidence of
invasion beyond the urinary bladder.
Dogs with no involvement of local lymph nodes had a 234-day survival time compared to
70 days for dogs with local lymph node involvement.
Dogs with evidence of distant tumor spread had a median survival time of 105 days, while
those without distant spread had a survival time of 203 days.
In one study (Wilson et al, Journal of the AVMA; July 2007) involving of 20 cats with TCC,
the median survival time was 261 days (this statistic includes cats with various treatments
including no treatment).
A belly ultrasound is needed to assess the involvement of local lymph nodes and
determine whether or not other organs have been invaded. Radiographs of the chest are
the usual way to screen for distant tumor spread; most tumors will spread to the lung,
leaving visible round opacities there.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 4/7
What are the Treatment Options?
Anyway you look at it, transitional cell carcinoma is bad news. It is aggressively malignant
and generally grows in an area not very amenable to surgical removal. If the tumor
becomes so large and deeply invasive that the patient cannot urinate, an unpleasant
death ensues in a matter of days. Ideally, the tumor is discovered and addressed before it
gets to this point. There are two approaches that can be explored: definitive treatment
(basically treating aggressively with the intent to achieve a long remission or even cure)
and palliative treatment (treating so as to restore temporary comfort only).
Surgical Options
Partial Removal of the Bladder (Palliative Treatment)
If the tumor is fairly small at the time it is detected (there is room enough for margins of 3
cm of the normal bladder to be removed around the tumor), it may be worth attempting to
remove it and this means removing part of the bladder. If one is very lucky, complete
removal or long-term survival is possible. (In one study, over half the patients were alive a
year after surgery!) Problems with this therapy include: the fact that it is not possible to
determine with the naked eye what the margins of the tumor actually are (so it is easy for
the surgeon to believe they have removed enough tissue when in fact there is more), and
reduced storage capacity of the remaining bladder after surgery leads to need to urinate
more frequently. If recurrence happens, it generally does so within one year of surgery
and is thought to occur from either inadequate tumor removal during surgery or the
development of a new tumor via the same mechanism that led to the original tumor. There
is evidence that using cyclooxygenase-inhibiting anti-inflammatory medications
(deracoxib, piroxicam) has activity against the TCC and can assist in the prevention of
recurrence; still, 80 percent of tumors will eventually recur.
Complete Removal of the Bladder (Definitive Treatment)
Complete removal of the urinary bladder is just as invasive as it sounds. The benefits of
this drastic procedure include long-term control of the tumor, even if the tumor is large
(median survival times are greater than 6 months in patients not receiving any other
treatment), and control of the pain associated with the tumor.
The main problem with this surgery is the resultant incontinence. The kidneys (where
urine is produced) normally deliver urine to the bladder for storage via tiny tubes called
ureters. After the bladder is removed, the ureters are attached to the colon so that the
patient effectively passes urine rectally along with stool. Alternatively, the ureters can be
attached to the vagina or another area.
This is a very radical surgery, and potential complications can include scarring of the
ureters and loss of kidney function, infection, and blood biochemical abnormalities.
Special diets are required after surgery as well as long-term antibiotics, frequent blood
test monitoring, and free access to an area for urination or pet diapers will be needed.
Permanent Urinary Catheter (Palliative Treatment)
A permanently placed urinary catheter can be implanted in the patient’s urinary tract to
create more comfortable urination. The placement of a foreign body in this way will
predispose the patient to bladder infection, and frequent screening cultures will be
needed; still, in one study, six out of seven owners reported satisfaction with the results.
Obviously, this procedure does nothing to hinder the tumor’s growth. Owners will need to
empty the bladder with a drainage tube at least three times a day to avoid stagnation of
urine. The entrance to the catheter must be cleaned daily. Tube dislodgement is a serious
complication. Newer tubes are short and a longer drainage tube is attached during
bladder emptying. More traditional permanent catheters are longer and will require some
sort of wrap or garment for protection. If a tube dislodges, it must be replaced within 48
hours as scar tissue rapidly forms to close the opening into the bladder. Sedation is
required for tube replacement; it is not something an owner can do at home.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Urethral Stenting (Palliative Treatment)
In this procedure, a metal stent is placed in the urethra to allow urine passage through the
tumor. This procedure is similar to the permanent catheter but is more high-tech. The stent
is placed either surgically or with a video radiography called fluoroscopy. The procedure is
relatively simple and not invasive, but does require specific equipment. Urinary
incontinence is unfortunately a common problem after this procedure (affecting 39 percent
of dogs that have it done) and special garments/diapers may be needed indoors. Female
patients are more predisposed to incontinence issues following stenting.
Laser Ablation with Chemotherapy (Palliative Treatment)
A study was published in the February 15, 2006, issue of the Journal of the AVMA where
seven dogs with transitional cell carcinomas were treated with a combination of laser
ablation, piroxicam (see below), and mitoxantrone (see below). Laser ablation has been
used for many years in humans with urinary tract cancer. In short, a surgical laser is used
to vaporize the tumor from the surface of the bladder and urethra. In the study above, the
eight dogs received this treatment followed by chemotherapy, and their symptoms and
survival were tracked. The median disease-free interval (i.e., the time without significant
symptoms) was 200 days, and the median survival time was 299 days. These survival
times were felt to be similar to those achieved with chemotherapy alone and no surgery at
all; however, a more lasting resolution of symptoms was felt to have been achieved with
this combination treatment. Please note that only seven dogs were studied (an eighth
received treatment but died after the first chemotherapy treatment from an automobile
accident); information from a larger population would be helpful in solidifying these
interpretations. Furthermore, laser ablation seems to be mostly an option for female dogs
because of the angles needed to access the tumor with the laser. It can be done in males,
but it is more invasive surgically.
Medication (Chemotherapy)
Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs (Piroxicam, Deracoxib, Firocoxib)
These medications are anti-inflammatory drugs frequently used to treat pain in dogs, but
they also appear to have actual anti-carcinoma activity. Piroxicam is the NSAID upon
which most research has been conducted. In one study of 62 dogs, three percent
experienced complete remission, 14 percent had tumor size reduced by more than 50
percent, and 56 percent of patients experienced no tumor growth during the period of the
study. The median survival time was 195 days. The Cox-2 inhibiting NSAIDs are safer,
next-generation anti-inflammatories, and several of these, too, seem to also have antitumor activity. NSAIDs can be used alone against TCC or they can be used to enhance
the effectiveness of more aggressive chemotherapy.
Mitoxantrone
A combination of piroxicam and mitoxantrone has been studied and yielded a measurable
response in 35 percent of patients. Approximately 18 percent had intestinal side effects
and 10 percent had kidney-related side effects. The median survival time was 350 days.
For many oncologists, this protocol is the first choice in therapy. Daily oral piroxicam is
used, and intravenous mitoxantrone is given every three weeks for four treatments.
Carboplatin
A combination of carboplatin and piroxicam was able to achieve a higher remission rate
(50-70%) but had more potential for side effects and shorter overall survival times.
Gemcitabine
Gemcitabine combined with piroxicam was able to generate a median survival time of 230
days, 5% complete remissions, 21% partial remissions, and 50% stable disease.
Radiation Therapy

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 6/7
In the past, radiation for bladder tumors has been problematic because of how close the
large intestine is. In other words, it has been hard to irradiate the bladder tumor without
also irradiating the large intestine and causing scarring or other radiation injury. Newer
technology has allowed for 3D imaging with CT scans to provide for intensity-modulated
radiotherapy. This has allowed for better targeting of the tumor. (A study of 21 dogs
revealed a median survival of 654 days.) Specifically equipped facilities are required to
deliver radiation therapy, and this special new technology may not be readily available, so
if you elect this sort of treatment, some sort of travel is likely to be needed.
Links
A consultation with an oncology specialist is recommended for more details on specific
treatments or if your veterinarian is uncomfortable treating TCC. Ask your veterinarian to
arrange a referral.
Cancer treatment for pets can be expensive and emotionally exhausting. Sometimes,
participation in a study where treatment is free is helpful. Animal Clinical Investigation LLC
is a Maryland-based Limited Liability Company founded by Chand Khanna, DVM, Ph.D.,
Diplomate—American College Veterinary Medicine (Oncology).
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951982&pid=19239
84bf63b6-b278-4a10-a3ed-59eeaf6cf201.1754154713
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:41 PM Transitional Cell Carcinoma in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254089&id=4951982&ind=62&objTypeID=1007 7/7
