Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats
Robert Prošek, DVM, MS, DACVIM, ECVIM-CA
Revised: February 07, 2025
Published: March 12, 2007
What Makes a Normal Heart Beat?
The heart is a large muscle with four chambers. There are two top chambers (left and
right) called the atria and two bottom chambers (left and right) called the ventricles. These
chambers fill with blood from the body and then contract to circulate or deliver poorly
oxygenated blood to the lungs (right side) or well-oxygenated blood to the rest of the
body's tissues (left side). The heart muscles contract after they are stimulated by an
electrical impulse. A small area of special tissue in the right atrium called the sinoatrial
(SA) node starts an electrical impulse (it’s like the heart’s spark plug) that travels out
through the atrial muscle, stimulating that muscle and simultaneously down special
electrical tracts (AV node, Bundle Branches, Purkinje Fibers – the heart’s “wiring”) to the
ventricles and ultimately out into the ventricular muscle (see Figure 2 below).
The electrical impulses cause the heart to contract in a coordinated fashion: the atria
contract first because they get stimulated first. As they contract, they push blood into the
ventricles. Then, as the electrical signal reaches the ventricles, they also contract and
push blood to either the lungs or the rest of the body. This coordinated electrical activity
can be recorded on an electrocardiogram (ECG or EKG). There are several components
to the normal ECG, called waves or complexes. They are labeled P, QRS, and T. The P
waves represent the atrial stimulation, while the QRS waves represent the ventricular
stimulation. The T waves represent the re-setting of the ventricular muscles so that they
can be stimulated by the next impulse. The short pause between the P waves and the
QRS waves is when the impulse travels along the wiring system from the atria to the
ventricles.
Atrial fibrillation (sometimes called “A-fib”) is an arrhythmia, an irregularity of the heart’s
rhythm. Instead of the SA node (the spark plug) starting and coordinating the electrical
signal, many areas within the atria send out electrical impulses in a rapid, disorganized
manner. This whirlwind of electrical impulses or wavelets spreads over the atrial tissue,
causing the atrial muscle to quiver or fibrillate instead of contracting in an organized,
structured manner (Figure 3). Only a fraction of the electrical impulses are able to jump
onto the “wiring system” and get across the AV node and down into the ventricles to make
the ventricles contract. The pattern with which all these abnormal atrial impulses are
conducted through the AV node is irregular, making the ventricles beat irregularly.
What Causes Atrial Fibrillation?
In humans, atrial fibrillation can occur for no apparent reason (often in athletes or older
people) because human heart size is large enough to allow such abnormal rhythms to
develop (veterinarians also see this type of atrial fibrillation in horses, which have large
hearts). However, most pets have much smaller hearts than humans, so for atrial
fibrillation to occur in your pet, the atrial chambers must usually be bigger than normal.
This enlargement of the atrial chambers occurs with many types of heart disease, such as

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=6048330&ind=64&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Copyright VIN
Figure 2. Graphic representation of a normal electrical impulse starting
in the sinoatrial node (SA) and traveling through the right atrium (RA)
and left atrium (LA) , through the AV node and right and left bundle
branches to cause a causing the heart muscle to contract in an
organized way. RV=right ventricle, LV=left ventricle.
degenerative
valve disease of
the mitral valve
or
cardiomyopathy,
dilated
cardiomyopathy,
and
hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy.
Generally, the
smaller your pet,
the more
significant the
heart disease
must be to
cause atrial
fibrillation.
Thus, atrial
fibrillation is
much less
common in cats
than in
dogs. And it’s less common in
small breed dogs than large
breed dogs.
Occasionally, giant and largebreed dogs develop atrial
fibrillation without any other heart
disease, similar to what we see in
humans and horses (let’s face it,
some Great Danes are almost as
big as horses!). This is termed
“lone” or primary atrial fibrillation.
In some cases, this “lone” atrial
fibrillation turns out to be the first
indication of dilated
cardiomyopathy; in other cases,
the arrhythmia exists without
underlying heart disease.
How Is Atrial Fibrillation
Diagnosed?
Often, the first idea that a pet has
atrial fibrillation is when your
veterinarian detects an erratic
heart rhythm while listening to the
heart with a stethoscope. Many
veterinarians describe the sound as bongo drums or shoes in a dryer. Your pet’s pulse
quality may also be irregular. However, to confirm the diagnosis, an electrocardiogram
(ECG) needs to be performed (because other arrhythmias can sound like atrial fibrillation).
There are specific ECG criteria that must be met prior to making the diagnosis.

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=6048330&ind=64&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Figure 3. Graphic representation of atrial fibrillation with whirlwind of
electrical impulses forming in the right (RA) and left atria (LA) instead a
single organized impulse from the sinoatrial (SA) node causing the
atrial muscle to fibrillate (quiver) instead of an organized contraction to
fill the right (RV) and left ventricles (LV).
A normal ECG
At times, a pet with severe heart
disease may suddenly become
weaker or have a relapse of heart
failure upon the development of
atrial fibrillation, prompting you to
visit your veterinarian. Again, the
veterinarian will auscultate the
abnormal rhythm and diagnose
atrial fibrillation via an ECG
examination.
In giant breeds with lone atrial
fibrillation, the arrhythmia may be
detected on routine examination—
often, the owners are unaware
that any problem exists. Some
dogs may develop mild exercise
intolerance when they develop
atrial fibrillation.
What Happens When a Pet
Develops Atrial Fibrillation?
People with lone atrial fibrillation
typically require treatment to reestablish a normal heart rhythm
because they usually have
exercise intolerance or shortness of breath, symptoms
of palpitations, and are at an increased risk of having a
stroke. If a normal rhythm cannot be re-established,
people are often placed on “blood thinners” to reduce
the risk of stroke. However, dogs with lone atrial
fibrillation rarely show exercise intolerance or
shortness of breath and do not suffer from strokes, so
treatment is rarely required. Their heart rate remains
normal in most cases.
However, in a pet with serious heart disease, atrial
fibrillation causes a worsening of clinical signs and can
further damage the heart. Cardiac output, or the amount of blood pumped out of the heart
to the rest of the body, is reduced, and often congestive heart failure develops or recurs.
These pets usually have very fast heart rates (more than 200 beats per minute), which, if
not controlled, can lead to additional heart muscle damage and dysfunction.
How Is Atrial Fibrillation Treated?
Treatment in people is aimed at re-establishing and maintaining a normal rhythm, because
this greatly reduces the risk of strokes. This is usually achieved by delivering a “shock” to
the heart (termed electrocardioversion), or by using antiarrhythmic drugs. Recent studies
in people suggest that re-establishing a normal rhythm is not essential and medical
therapy might suffice if clinical signs are tolerable or absent.
In pets, cardioversion is generally not feasible. Several studies have examined
electrocardioversion or chemical cardioversion in dogs with lone atrial fibrillation – none
has shown consistent success. Newer studies are being conducted that may ultimately
provide a technique that allows a normal rhythm to be established in these pets.

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=6048330&ind=64&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Pets with severe heart disease are generally not candidates for cardioversion. In these
pets, a normal rhythm can rarely, if ever, be re-established. Instead, the veterinarian
attempts to reduce the high heart rate with antiarrhythmic drugs. By reducing the heart
rate (which is often more than 200 beats per minute), the veterinarian allows the heart to
pump more efficiently and prevents some of the damage that the high heart rate can
produce. Additionally, the clinical signs associated with the development of atrial fibrillation
(that is, congestive heart failure) resolve when the rate is controlled. The drugs that
decrease the heart rate need to be given indefinitely to maintain rate control and will
generally be added to drugs already being administered. Studies have shown that dogs
whose heart rate is reduced to 120 beats per minute (average over a day) do better than
dogs whose heart rate is not as well controlled. In other words, the closer to “normal” your
veterinarian can bring the heart rate, the better the outcome.
People with atrial fibrillation are usually treated with anti-coagulants, such as warfarin, or
other similar drugs (commonly, but incorrectly, termed blood thinners), to reduce the
incidence of strokes, which can be devastating or fatal. However, dogs with atrial
fibrillation do not appear to have an increased risk of strokes and are therefore not treated
with anti-coagulants. Cats with atrial fibrillation usually have severe heart disease and are
often treated with anti-coagulants, whether they have atrial fibrillation or not.
What is the prognosis for a pet with atrial fibrillation?
Lone atrial fibrillation, like we see in large or giant-breed dogs, is well tolerated, even if we
cannot convert it back to a normal sinus rhythm. In dogs with underlying severe heart
disease, 50 percent of those with higher heart rates (more than 125 beats per minute) in
one study had died from their heart disease within four months. On the other hand, 50
percent of those with lower heart rates (less than 125 beats per minute) lived for at least
three years. Whether or not these numbers reflect what will happen with all dogs is hard to
say, but we can say that bringing the heart rate close to normal improves survival.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6048330&pid=19239
b3de1715-1356-41df-98a3-e2e4a9fdab1c.1754155120
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Atrial Fibrillation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=6048330&ind=64&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: April 09, 2024
Published: April 06, 2018
What is Congestive Heart Failure?
Congestive heart failure (CHF) is the
clinical syndrome of fluid retention due to
severe heart disease. In dogs and cats, the
fluid is retained in specific parts of the
body, depending on the side of the heart
that is diseased.
If the left side of the heart is
diseased (e.g. mitral valve disease,
most dilated cardiomyopathies,
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, and
most common congenital cardiac
defects), fluid is mostly retained in the lungs or within the pleural cavity (the
chest space around the lungs).
If the right side of the heart is diseased, fluid is retained mostly in the belly or
within the pleural cavity.
Why Does CHF Occur?
CHF occurs because the pressure in the veins and capillaries draining into the diseased
side of the heart increases to the point that fluid leaks out of the veins and capillaries. The
capillaries and veins that drain into the left side of the heart are those coming from the
lungs, so fluid leaks into the lungs. The capillaries and veins that drain into the right side
of the heart are those coming from the body, so fluid leaks into the belly (ascites) or
creates swelling in the legs, the skin under the belly, etc.; swelling of the legs or the skin is
uncommon in dogs and cats with right-sided CHF, but much more common in humans and
horses.
It can be useful to think of this like a garden soaker hose. If water is flowing through the
hose under low pressure, only a little bit of water leaks through the soaker hose. However,
if we increase the pressure inside the hose, water starts to emerge from the soaker hose
at a much greater rate and floods your garden. The same happens with the capillaries –
under low pressure, only a little fluid leaks out of them (and is resorbed). But if the
pressure is too high, a large volume of fluid leaks out into the surrounding tissue, and
overwhelms the resorption mechanisms.
What Causes CHF?
CHF requires severe heart disease that increases the resting (diastolic) cardiac pressure.
For example, diseases that cause leakage of valves (mitral or tricuspid valve disease) can
result in CHF if the leak is big enough. Cardiomyopathies also cause the resting cardiac
pressure to increase and can result in CHF. Pericardial diseases can prevent the heart

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8501760&ind=65&objTypeID=1007 1/4
from relaxing and stretching properly, which can result in right-sided CHF. Heartworm
disease can cause right-sided CHF. Many congenital defects that shunt blood can result in
CHF (e.g. patent ductus arteriosus, ventricular or atrial septal defects).
Importantly, congenital diseases that obstruct outflow from the heart, such as pulmonic
stenosis or aortic stenosis, do not normally cause CHF.
What Are the Clinical Signs of CHF?
This depends on the side of the heart that is diseased. Let’s start with left-sided CHF,
which causes pulmonary edema and, sometimes, pleural effusion. As fluid starts to
deposit fluid into animals’ lungs, the amount of oxygen in the blood decreases because it
can’t be absorbed from the lungs. Human patients describe this as shortness of breath,
initially during exertion, such as climbing stairs, and eventually even when stationary.
However, animals cannot tell us if they are short of breath. Sometimes, owners will notice
a decrease in exercise ability, such as not going as far on walks and getting winded on
walks more quickly. However, many things can cause exercise intolerance. Therefore, we
tend to look for an increase in breathing (respiratory) rate, especially when sleeping.
Coughing has been described as a feature of CHF in dogs, but there is some doubt as to
whether CHF really causes coughing or not. Again, many dogs and cats cough for
reasons other than heart disease. As the fluid continues to build up, dogs and cats will
also show difficulty in breathing as well as a faster respiratory rate. This is especially true
of cats, who can hide their disease until it becomes really advanced. Consequently, many
cats see veterinarians with labored, open-mouth breathing that is almost gulping for air,
which appears to have started all of a sudden. In dogs, the clinical signs can be more
gradual and subtle.
With right-sided CHF, the most common presentation is a swelling of the abdomen
(ascites), making the dog appear pregnant. The discomfort from a belly full of fluid results
in difficulty getting comfortable or breathing comfortably when lying down. These dogs will
even resort to sleeping in a sitting position at times! Appetite often decreases slightly
because of the abdominal pressure.
If there is a buildup of fluid in the chest cavity, the animal might show difficulty in
breathing.
How Do Veterinarians Diagnose CHF?
The diagnosis of CHF relies on pairing the clinical signs of increased respiratory rate and
difficulty in breathing with the severe heart disease that is responsible for these clinical
signs. Many times, a murmur can be heard for the first time. The pet’s heart rate will be
elevated, their respiratory rate will be elevated. Some cats come in with a low body
temperature because they are somewhat shocky from inadequate oxygen.
If veterinarians suspect CHF, they will generally take chest X-rays to see if there is
evidence of (A) severe heart disease that appears as an enlarged heart; and (B) opacity
(areas through which light does not pass) in the lungs consistent with pulmonary edema,
or fluid in the chest cavity consistent with pleural effusion. If they are unsure or require
additional information, they might perform or recommend a cardiac ultrasound. Those are
often performed by specialists, typically veterinary cardiologists or radiologists, who have
the necessary equipment.
How Do we Treat CHF?
Treatment is directed at both the underlying heart disease and the accumulation of fluid. If
possible, the cause should be corrected. For example, closing a congenital shunt, such as
a patent ductus arteriosus, will immediately correct the problem permanently. Repairing a
leaking mitral valve will also correct the problem almost immediately, although this
procedure is currently very expensive and performed by a limited number of surgeons.

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8501760&ind=65&objTypeID=1007 2/4
The mainstay of medical treatment of left-sided CHF is the use of diuretics called loop
diuretics, which include furosemide or torsemide. Diuretics reduce blood volume and
consequently reduce the pressure in the veins, forcing the fluid out into the lungs or the
abdomen.
Other drugs that are commonly used to treat CHF include angiotensin-converting enzyme
inhibitors, pimobendan, thiazide diuretics, and spironolactone. These are much less
effective than loop diuretics and should never be given as the only drugs for managing
CHF. Indeed, if a dog or cat does not require a diuretic, they most likely do not have CHF.
The fluid buildup in right-sided CHF often requires repeated manual removal, using large
catheters to make the patient feel better. In many dogs, this can be done as frequently as
every week or two. Ideally, when coupled with medical treatment, the frequency of belly
taps can be reduced somewhat.
How Do we Monitor CHF?
The most important thing to monitor with left-sided CHF is respiratory rate. Provided the
respiratory rate when sleeping is in the normal range, we can be reasonably confident that
we have good control of the CHF. When the sleeping respiratory rate starts to increase,
adjustments in treatment might be necessary; a veterinarian will evaluate the patient to
determine exactly what to do in such instances. (See monitoring videos below.)
Many veterinarians will monitor bloodwork to make sure that the medications being given
are not causing problems with kidneys or elsewhere.
If a pet appears to destabilize after a period of control, additional x-rays might help better
evaluate the situation.
What is the Prognosis?
This depends somewhat on the underlying disease. With the more common diseases,
such as mitral valve disease in dogs or hypertrophic cardiomyopathy in cats, once CHF is
diagnosed and treatment instituted, survival is generally less than two years. With mitral
valve disease, approximately 50 percent of dogs will succumb to their disease within 8 to
10 months, and only 20 percent live for 18 to 24 months. With hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy survival data are less clear, but some older studies suggest that 50
percent of cats will succumb to the disease within 7 to 10 months. As is always the case, a
few individuals will live longer than expected.
Canine Sleeping Respiratory Rate
Feline Sleeping Respiratory Rate
0:00

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8501760&ind=65&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Canine Resting Respiratory Rate
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8501760&pid=19239
1965a146-8915-43ff-836b-315cb825fbb5.1754155366
0:00
0:00
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:52 PM Congestive Heart Failure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8501760&ind=65&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Pinnal Vasculitis (canine ear) Courtesy of VIN
Dermatology Consultants
Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Published: March 06, 2023
Vasculitis is an inflammatory process of the blood vessels (arteries, veins, or capillaries).
Cutaneous means the skin is affected. When skin blood vessels are inflamed, this is
called cutaneous vasculitis. Weakened or narrowed vessels, and sometimes blood clots,
decrease the flow of oxygen and nutrients to the skin. Cutaneous vasculitis is uncommon
in dogs and cats.
What Does Cutaneous Vasculitis Look Like?
Signs of cutaneous vasculitis depend on the size and location of the affected blood
vessels. Early cases may have only hair loss. Other signs of cutaneous vasculitis include
redness, swelling, sores, and bleeding. A dog or cat with cutaneous vasculitis may only
have skin changes or may also have other signs such as decreased appetite, lethargy, or
fever.
Cutaneous vasculitis can cause skin changes in one place or over most of the body. Ears,
tail tips, and paw pads are common sites. When a dog or cat’s ear flap (pinna) is involved,
this is called pinnal vasculitis. One or both ears may have hair loss, crusts, and bleeding.
When vasculitis affects a dog’s tail, tail wagging can knock scabs from the tail tip and
cause bleeding. Severe cases of cutaneous vasculitis on the paw pads can lead to
bleeding wounds (ulcers) in the center of the paw pads, making it painful for the dog or cat
to walk. Because blood vessels in the ears and tail are small, pinnal, and tail tip vasculitis
can lead to a severe block in blood flow. Parts of the ear and tail can then die off
(necrosis) and appear black.
How is Cutaneous Vasculitis Diagnosed?
Many other skin issues look like cutaneous
vasculitis. The veterinarian may take samples
for skin tests to look for other causes of hair loss
and crusty skin such as bacteria, yeasts, and
mites. Because blood vessels are throughout
the body, the veterinarian will also examine your
dog and cat for other signs of vasculitis.
Several tests are then used to diagnose and
determine the type of vasculitis. Different types
of inflammation lead to different forms of
cutaneous vasculitis.
Cutaneous vasculitis can also be a sign of
another disease that is damaging blood vessels
elsewhere in the body. For this reason, the veterinarian may also perform one or more of
the following tests:
Blood tests
Urine tests

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=11409108&ind=66&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Paw Pad Lesion (canine) Courtesy of Dr. Amelia White
X-rays
Ultrasound, a noninvasive test that uses sound waves to take pictures of the
body
Skin biopsy, a test in which a small piece of skin is removed through minor skin
surgery, and the blood vessels are examined under a microscope by a
veterinary pathologist.
Your pet may also be referred to a veterinary dermatologist, a veterinarian who specializes
in ear and skin diseases, to determine if a biopsy is necessary and for additional care.
What Causes Cutaneous Vasculitis?
Although we don’t know why vasculitis happens, sometimes vasculitis follows an infection.
It may also be the result of medications, vaccinations, or food. Although frostbite can
occur on the ear flaps of dogs and cats, frostbite is a different condition. Cold weather is
not a common cause of cutaneous vasculitis. Sometimes, a specific cause of vasculitis
cannot be determined (idiopathic).
How is Cutaneous Vasculitis Treated?
The main goals of treatment are to stop
inflammation and prevent more damage to
the body while avoiding medication side
effects where possible. Some cases respond
quickly to one medication and then the
medication can be stopped. Other cases
require multiple medications before getting a
good response. No matter which treatment is
chosen, follow the instructions from your
pet’s veterinarian.
What is the Long-term Prognosis for
Cutaneous Vasculitis?
This depends on the type of cutaneous
vasculitis and, sometimes, how quickly the
vasculitis was diagnosed and treated.
Lesions may come and go, especially as
medications are adjusted. If your dog or cat
continues to develop new signs of cutaneous vasculitis when medications are decreased,
you may need to treat them for the rest of their lives.
The skin on the ears that has already died off (necrosis) will not grow back. Instead, there
will be a scar, and part of the ear will remain missing. However, many medications can be
used to manage vasculitis and prevent more damage to the skin. Diagnosing and treating
the cause of the cutaneous vasculitis with your pet’s veterinarian can also make this
disease easier to manage.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11409108&pid=19239
1965a146-8915-43ff-836b-315cb825fbb5.1754155433
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=11409108&ind=66&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Cutaneous Vasculitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=11409108&ind=66&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: September 15, 2020
The diaphragm is a thin muscle that separates the organs in the chest (heart, lungs) from
the organs in the abdomen. It is also involved in breathing: when the diaphragm contracts,
it helps pull air into the lungs.
A hernia develops when an organ pushes through a weak spot in the muscle around it,
creating a hole.
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being
pushed through a hole in the diaphragm. That hole is the hernia. The hole can be caused
by trauma, such as being hit by a car, or it can be congenital, meaning that the pet was
born with it.
Peritoneopericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia
A certain type of defect that has a big name - peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia -
is not nearly as complicated as it sounds. As we know, the diaphragm is a muscle that
runs between the chest and abdomen. It helps us breathe by affecting the communication
between the double-walled sac that contains the heart and the membrane that lines the
belly. The heart sac is called the pericardium and the membrane is called the peritoneum.
What happens with this type of hernia is that abdominal organs can move through the
hole in the diaphragm directly into the heart sac. Obviously, abdominal organs are not
supposed to be in the heart sac. Usually cats and dogs are born with this type of hernia,
but trauma can also cause it.
Diaphragmatic Hernia Symptoms
When the abdominal organs have moved through the hole in the diaphragm, they become
trapped and lose their blood supply. Misplaced organs in the chest can also crowd the
lungs, or in the case of peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias they can crowd the
heart, preventing pets from breathing normally or letting the heartbeat correctly.
Symptoms can include coughing, poor appetite, laying around more, trouble breathing or
taking rapid and short breaths, fever, and collapse. In some cases, pets can live for many
years without any symptoms, especially if the abdominal organs are able to move easily in
and out of the chest or the hole is too small to allow movement through it. Such hernias
may be found unexpectedly while addressing another problem.
Diagnosing a Hernia
For diagnosis, the veterinarian will perform a thorough physical examination. Sometimes a
veterinarian will become suspicious when they hear tummy grumbles in the chest instead
of in the belly. X-rays of hernias often show abdominal contents in the chest, or unusual
gas patterns or shadows. If the X-rays don’t show an obvious answer, the veterinarian
may give an ultrasound or they may choose a barium series, in which they feed the pet a
type of medicine called barium to highlight the stomach and intestines on additional Xrays.
Treatment

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=9808794&ind=67&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Treatment requires surgery to fix the hole in the diaphragm (and heart for
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias) and move the abdominal organs back into the
belly. If the organs are severely damaged from being trapped in the chest, surgery to fix
the damage or remove the entire organ may also be necessary.
Unfortunately, diaphragmatic hernia repair carries some risk because the diaphragm helps
us breathe. Because of this risk, some veterinarians will avoid surgery in pets that do not
show symptoms. The issue with waiting until symptoms occur to perform a risky surgery
means that organ damage may be irreparable by the time surgery is performed, so it is
important to fully discuss the pros and cons of a wait-and-see approach with your
veterinarian.
For pets that do undergo surgical repair, once the pet has fully recovered and healed from
surgery, they are unlikely to experience future issues.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9808794&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155462
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=9808794&ind=67&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Photo by VIN
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: January 22, 2024
Published: March 05, 2019
Can pet diets cause heart problems?
Yes. Thirty years ago, veterinarians
recognized deficiency of an amino acid
(taurine) as the most common cause of
dilated cardiomyopathy in cats. Cats are
unable to make their taurine (just like
people can’t make their own vitamin C) and
must ingest it to stay healthy. Taurine is
plentiful in most animal tissues.
Being carnivores, domestic, feral, and wild
cats that hunt for food get adequate
amounts of taurine from their diet.
However, some commercial cat foods at
that time contained insufficient amounts of
taurine causing dilated cardiomyopathy
and other health issues. This discovery resulted in pet food companies adding more
taurine to their manufactured foods. Subsequently, taurine-associated dilated
cardiomyopathy in cats has all but disappeared. It is occasionally diagnosed when cat
owners feed unbalanced diets (e.g., boiled poultry or vegetarian diets).
A few years later, certain breeds of dogs were found to also have dilated cardiomyopathy
in association with taurine deficiency. This was unexpected because dogs, unlike cats,
can synthesize taurine from other sulfur-containing amino acids in their food.
Investigators suspected that these breeds were unable to synthesize taurine in amounts
needed to replace losses. Taurine is typically efficiently recycled in the small intestine, but
various dietary factors can affect this process. When supplemented with high doses of
taurine, these dogs resolved their cardiomyopathy in many cases.
Since that time, specific categories of diets have been sporadically linked to heart
disease. One group of Newfoundlands that were fed a commercial lamb-and-rice diet
developed taurine deficiency and reversible cardiomyopathy. Other dogs have also been
found to have a taurine deficiency when fed similar lamb-and-rice diets. Occasionally,
dogs fed vegan or vegetarian diets have been taurine deficient and suffer heart disease.
Most recently, Golden Retrievers have been identified as having a taurine-deficiency
associated cardiomyopathy.
Is diet-associated cardiomyopathy caused by taurine deficiency?
The evidence suggests that the recent “outbreak” of cardiomyopathy in dogs is likely not
primarily related to taurine deficiency. Blood assays of taurine in many affected dogs
show normal taurine concentrations. The observations suggesting this condition is related
to taurine deficiency originate from populations where several of the affected dogs were

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8989590&ind=68&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Golden Retrievers (who are a special case, as described above). It is hypothesized by
some that being taurine deficient makes these dogs more susceptible to whatever is
causing the diet-associated cardiomyopathy. Because of concerns from some veterinary
researchers about the methods used to assess taurine status in the studied populations
with few or no Golden Retrievers, we cannot completely rule out the role of taurine
deficiency at this time in all breeds. Time will tell.
If it’s not taurine, what is the cause?
We don’t know. The only common link that investigators have observed is “grain-free”
diets that use lentils and other legumes (peas) as the “base ingredient.” There are many
theories, but no definitive answers explaining how these diets cause cardiomyopathy.
There is also a lack of reporting and consistent data collection on diet-related heart issues
in pets. Cardiomyopathy is most likely caused by a combination of genetics, other medical
conditions, and diet.
Are all “limited ingredient” or “grain free” diets at fault?
Some dogs are prescribed diets to diagnose and treat allergies (skin or gastrointestinal
diseases). Such diets might include a limited number of uncommon ingredients, such as
salmon, kangaroo, potatoes, peas, etc. At this point, no therapeutic diets, manufactured
by the major pet food manufacturers (Hills, Purina, Royal Canin), have been associated
with cases of diet-associated cardiomyopathy.
There is no medical or nutritional indication for “grain free” although some veterinary
therapeutic diets recommended to diagnose and treat allergies are also grain free. They
are chosen because the ingredients happen to be novel for the specific patient, but they
are not used because they lack grains per se. Grain free is simply a marketing category
and there is no specific benefit.
In recent years, canine diets containing pulses, which are the dried seeds of foods like
chickpeas, lentils, beans, and dry peas, have been linked to diet-associated
cardiomyopathy versus just the presence or absence of grains (corn, rice, and wheat).
What should I do if my dog eats a grain-free legume-based or other implicated diet?
First, check the ingredient label. If peas or lentils are the main ingredient (or main
carbohydrate source), consider changing to a diet that contains grains.
Second, if you are reluctant to change the diet, consult your veterinarian about having a
cardiac ultrasound (echocardiogram) to see if your dog has evidence of cardiomyopathy.
If your dog is found to be affected, even if it’s showing no clinical signs, change the diet to
a grain-based commercial diet. Most nutritionists recommend using the WSAVA guidelines
for the selection of commercial diets.
Third, if you have a dog that is “at risk” for taurine deficiency (American Cocker Spaniel,
Golden Retriever, Newfoundland, Dalmatian) and eating an implicated diet, have the
blood taurine levels checked. Measure both whole blood and plasma collected at the
same time to enable the most accurate interpretation of your dog’s taurine status. If those
are low, determine if the dog has cardiomyopathy with a cardiac ultrasound, change the
diet, and supplement taurine as directed by your veterinarian.
The more data collected, the more likely researchers will be able to resolve whether
taurine deficiency plays a primary or secondary role in causing this diet-associated
cardiomyopathy.
Your veterinarian or veterinary cardiologist is the one best able to advise you about the
most appropriate course of action for your dog.
What about cats?

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8989590&ind=68&objTypeID=1007 2/3
A few cat cases have been reported to the FDA, but the numbers are too small to say
anything definitive. This appears to be primarily a dog problem.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8989590&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155491
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:54 PM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8989590&ind=68&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Graphic by Tamara Rees of VIN
Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats
Robert Prošek, DVM, MS, DACVIM, ECVIM-CA
Revised: October 31, 2023
Published: February 06, 2007
Dilated
cardiomyopathy (DCM) is one of the more common acquired heart diseases in dogs. DCM
is a primary disease of the heart muscle (cardio = heart; myo = muscle; pathy = disease)
in which the myocardium (heart muscle) of the ventricles (lower pumping chambers)
becomes weak and so loses its ability to contract normally. DCM most commonly affects
the left side of the heart (the side that receives blood from the lungs and pumps it to the
body), specifically the left ventricle. When the myocardium cannot pump blood out of the
left heart effectively, the kidneys retain sodium and water to increase the amount of blood
returning to the heart. This leads to an enlargement of the ventricles to compensate for
the ineffective pumping. This is helpful for years but ultimately becomes detrimental when
it causes the blood pressure in the heart to back up into the lungs, thereby causing
pulmonary edema (fluid accumulation within the lungs). This is called heart failure or
congestive heart failure (CHF).
Although less common, DCM affecting the right ventricle can also occur. Blood backs up
on the right side, which receives blood from the body and pumps it to the lungs, resulting
in right-sided CHF, where fluid accumulates in the abdomen (ascites) and chest (pleural
effusion). DCM affecting the right ventricle is almost always accompanied by DCM of the
left ventricle.
What Breeds get DCM?

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952598&ind=69&objTypeID=1007 1/5
There are several breeds that are predisposed to DCM. These include Doberman
Pinschers, Great Danes, Irish Wolfhounds, Boxers, Newfoundlands, Portuguese Water
Dogs, Dalmatians and Cocker Spaniels. DCM is not just limited to specific breeds. Large
and giant breeds are most commonly affected, but it also occurs in smaller breed dogs
and cats as well.
The causes of DCM in these breeds vary, as explained below.
What Causes DCM?
Because of the strong breed association, DCM almost certainly is inherited in many
breeds. Genetic mutations that are associated with DCM have been identified in
Doberman Pinschers, Boxers, and Standard Schnauzers. Genetic testing for these
mutations can be done for each.
Boxers get a specific type of cardiomyopathy called arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy (ARVC). Approximately 90% of these dogs in the USA have a ventricular
arrhythmia and an otherwise normally functioning heart. They are prone to fainting and
sudden death. The fainting most commonly happens when they develop a very fast heart
rate (greater than 400 beats/min). Sudden death usually occurs when this fast rate
degenerates into ventricular fibrillation (cardiac arrest). Approximately 10% also get DCM
as a part of their disease. The disease is associated with a genetic mutation in a gene
called striatin.
In some dogs, DCM is due to a nutritional deficiency. Taurine is an amino acid required for
the development and function of the myocardium. Consequently, pets may develop DCM
on taurine-deficient diets, such as vegetarian diets, and may benefit from appropriate
supplementation. Some breeds, such as American Cocker Spaniels and Golden
Retrievers, may have a predisposition to taurine deficiency, possibly through defects in
metabolizing taurine. Many, but not all, cases that are supplemented with taurine will
improve. Some also need carnitine supplementation. If your pet is diagnosed with DCM,
testing for a taurine deficiency may be warranted. Breeds such as Doberman Pinschers
and Great Danes do not have taurine-deficient cardiomyopathy. Some cats may develop
taurine-deficient DCM, although this has become rare as taurine is now added to virtually
all quality cat foods (see Feline Cardiomyopathy).
L-carnitine is another amino acid that has rarely been implicated in the development of
DCM in people. L-carnitine is required for the myocardial cells to produce energy and thus
contract. There is some evidence that a deficiency in this molecule will contribute to
myocardial dysfunction in Boxers (one small study only). Some American cocker spaniels
need to be supplemented with it, along with taurine, to produce a beneficial response.
However, the role of carnitine in most DCM cases is very limited.
In 2018, grain-free diets were implicated in causing DCM in dogs, especially in breeds that
do not typically get DCM. Read more details about this potential cause.
Occasionally, toxins can cause DCM. The most common toxin is doxorubicin (Adriamycin),
an anti-cancer drug used to treat various cancers in dogs. In some cases, dogs receiving
doxorubicin will develop DCM.
Infectious causes of DCM are rare. Puppies infected with parvovirus at two to four weeks
of age can develop DCM. These days, vaccinating the mother protects the puppies
against parvovirus during this susceptible period, so this cause of DCM is rarely seen.
Chagas disease (Trypanosomiasis) can cause DCM in geographic areas where it is found
(Texas and Mexico).
What are the Signs of DCM?
Signs of DCM vary depending on the breed of dog and stage of the disease. Loss of
appetite, pale gums, increased heart rate, coughing, difficulty breathing, periods of
weakness, and fainting are signs commonly seen. Since blood is backed up into the

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952598&ind=69&objTypeID=1007 2/5
lungs, respiratory signs (CHF) due to pulmonary edema are most common. Blood
returning to the right side of the heart from the body may also back up leading to fluid
accumulation in the abdomen (ascites) or in the chest cavity (pleural effusion). Weakness
or collapse may be caused by arrhythmias (abnormal heart rhythms) and occasionally,
depressed cardiac output (decreased blood flow to the body).
In some breeds, sudden death or fainting can occur well before any signs of CHF.
How is DCM Diagnosed?
There are two different methods used to diagnose pets: during a screening exam of an
apparently normal dog (e.g., as part of a breeding program), and during examination of a
dog with clinical signs of heart disease.
Screening Exams for DCM
Many conscientious breeders and owners of dogs that are predisposed to DCM screen
their pets for heart disease to try to minimize the risk of transmitting the disease to
offspring. Screening for DCM in dogs can be expensive and complex. The screening test
of choice depends on the breed of the dog and the stage of the disease.
The first step is a good physical examination. In most cases, the physical examination is
completely normal. Occasionally, the veterinarian may detect an arrhythmia (abnormal
heart rhythm). In Doberman Pinschers and Boxers, a 24-hour ECG recording using a 24-
hour ambulatory ECG monitor (Holter monitor) is often the best way to screen dogs for
early signs of DCM since an abnormal rhythm often occurs before any detectable changes
in myocardial contractility. An echocardiogram (an ultrasound scan of the heart) is also
used to identify dogs with DCM before they develop clinical signs, but many dogs with
mild disease have equivocal findings. This examination is best performed by a board
certified veterinary cardiologist.
Genetic testing should be done by breeders of the specific breeds where a mutation or
mutations have been identified.
Diagnosis in Dogs with Clinical Signs
A thorough physical examination by your veterinarian, coupled with your pet's clinical
signs and specific breed, may help make the presumptive diagnosis of DCM. Tests that
help support the diagnosis are an ECG (electrocardiogram) and x-rays (radiographs) of
the chest. The ECG may show an arrhythmia and/or an elevated heart rate. The chest
radiographs may show an enlarged heart and/or fluid in the lung tissue or chest cavity.
Some dogs may have normal chest radiographs, but have arrhythmias on their ECG.
These pets may be in the early stages of DCM (see above).
In dogs with clinical signs of heart failure, an echocardiogram is necessary to confirm the
diagnosis of DCM. With an echocardiogram, a cardiologist can visualize the heart and
assess its function. A decrease in heart pumping function (contraction) means that the
patient has DCM. Your veterinarian may also perform blood tests to look for any
underlying nutritional or infectious conditions if the specific case warrants such
investigation.
How is DCM Treated?
Treatment of heart failure is based on each patient. Drugs commonly used are diuretics
(most commonly furosemide), ACE inhibitors, and pimobendan. The diuretic forces the
kidneys to excrete more sodium and water. It is used to eliminate pulmonary edema (fluid
in the lungs) and so improve breathing and/or effusion (fluid accumulation in the chest or
abdominal cavities). Pimobendan increases the force of contraction of the ventricles and
dilates blood vessels. Both furosemide and pimobendan are effective treatments that
prolong survival and improve quality of life.
Pimobendan might increase the time until onset of heart failure in Doberman Pinschers
with DCM.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952598&ind=69&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Management of arrhythmias is often an important part of managing DCM. Dogs with atrial
fibrillation are most commonly treated with a combination of digoxin and diltiazem in order
to reduce the heart rate. Sotalol alone or in combination with other antiarrhythmic drugs is
used in Boxers and in some Doberman Pinschers to suppress ventricular premature
complexes and tachycardia to stop the dog from fainting and from dying suddenly.
Mexiletine is also commonly used in Doberman Pinschers.
In nutritional DCM, specific supplements will be prescribed. Patients with right-sided heart
failure may also have fluid physically removed from the abdomen and/or chest cavity by
the veterinarian to make the patient more comfortable.
In humans, DCM patients usually get heart transplants. However, this option does not
exist for veterinary patients. Other surgical procedures have been evaluated, but currently
none are being offered for patient care.
What is the Prognosis of a Pet Diagnosed with DCM?
Unfortunately, in most cases DCM is a progressive, irreversible, and ultimately fatal
disease. Survival depends on the stage of disease, the breed of the patient, the specific
type of DCM that patient has, and treatment compliance. In taurine-deficient DCM,
correcting the deficiency in cats results in complete cure. In dogs, correcting the
deficiency may result in at least partial reversal of the disease and prolonged survival;
however, some cases relapse after several years.
DCM is a slowly progressive disease. If it is diagnosed in the early stages, the patient may
live several years before developing clinical signs. In some breeds, such as Doberman
Pinschers, sudden death accounts for 30% of the deaths from DCM, well before these
dogs ever develop CHF.
In other breeds with DCM, such as Doberman Pinschers and Great Danes, in dogs
showing clinical signs of CHF medical therapy can help prolong survival. Historical
average survival for Doberman Pinschers with clinical DCM was two to three months.
However, with pimobendan, recent studies have seen extended survival for this breed to
one year. Less is known about outcomes of other breeds with DCM. Once the diagnosis of
DCM is made, ask your veterinarian to discuss your pet's prognosis on an individual basis.
Can I do Anything to Prevent DCM or Slow its Progression?
Currently, the primary intervention that has been shown to alter the course of DCM is
nutritional supplementation in dogs with a nutritional deficiency (i.e., taurine deficiency).
Since the majority of cases are thought to be genetic, breeding from lines unaffected by
the disease helps reduce the chance of inheriting DCM. Genetic tests, when they are
available, are of value in determining breeding strategies. In Doberman Pinschers,
pimobendan has been reported to prolong a composite survival endpoint although it did
not prolong the time until the onset of heart failure and did not prolong the time until
sudden death.
What about Other Supplements?
Multivitamin supplements, nutritional supplements, Co-enzyme Q10, and non-Western
herbal supplements have all been used for DCM, but none have been examined critically
to determine if they hurt or help patients. Use of these supplements is best discussed with
your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952598&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155512

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952598&ind=69&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Dilated Cardiomyopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952598&ind=69&objTypeID=1007 5/5
A dog uses an underwater treadmill for rehabilitation. Photo by Karen
James.
Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 11, 2023
Published: May 01, 2004
Imagine your dog is happily playing
in the yard, jumps up to catch a
ball, lands badly, and comes up not
just lame but weak or even
paralyzed in a back leg. Possibly
both back legs. The toes of the
affected foot may knuckle under.
Maybe his back tilts downward, his
rear legs too weak to rise all the
way up. You check him over, trying
to find where it hurts, and it simply
does not seem to hurt at all.
There are many conditions that
might fit here, but the neurologic
knuckling and the absence of a
tender spot suggest
a fibrocartilaginous
embolism (FCE).
What is FCE, Anyway?
To understand FCE (fibrocartilaginous embolism), one has to understand some anatomy
of the vertebral column. The vertebral column consists of numerous small bones called
vertebrae that are linked together by joints called intervertebral disks. The disks are
similar to the joints that connect arm or leg bones together in many ways. They allow
flexibility between vertebrae so that you can arch or twist your back voluntarily, just as you
can flex and extend a knee or elbow.
The disks are unique as well. A joint of the appendicular skeleton, say a knee or elbow,
has a capsule that secretes a lubricating fluid. The bones are capped with smooth
cartilage to facilitate frictionless gliding as the surfaces move during flexion and extension.
The disk is nothing like this. It is more like a cushion between the end plates of the
vertebrae. It is round (hence the name disk) and fibrous on the outside with a soft
gelatinous inside to absorb the forces to which the bones are exposed. This jelly-like
inside material inside is called the nucleus pulposus, and it is this material that makes up
the fibrocartilaginous embolus.
The vertebral column provides a bony protective case around the vulnerable spinal cord.
The spinal cord is the cable of nerves and nerve connections that transmits messages to
and from the brain and controls the reflexes of the body. The spinal cord is fed by a
network of spinal arteries.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952058&ind=70&objTypeID=1007 1/5
In FCE, somehow the material from the nucleus pulposus, all the way in the center of the
disk, gets into a spinal artery. The artery carries the nucleus pulposus material to the
spinal cord until the artery becomes too narrow for the nucleus pulposus to go any further.
The artery is plugged and the area of spinal cord it is supposed to feed dies. (The nucleus
pulposis is "fibrocartilaginous" in nature, and the artery obstruction is an "embolism.") This
process is not painful except possibly briefly at first, but recovery is far from guaranteed.
The good news is that after the first 24 hours, the condition is not going to get worse.
There are many theories of how disk material might gain access to the arterial blood
supply, but no one really knows how this happens.
The Typical Patient
Any dog can be a victim of FCE, although about half of the victims are large-breed dogs.
Some feel the Miniature Schnauzer has a higher risk for FCE as this breed tends to
circulate excess blood fats and cholesterol, which may predispose to embolism.
Breeds that are called chondrodystrophic (meaning they have as part of their normal
breed conformation dwarf-like characteristics) tend to calcify their disk material, making it
too hard to participate in an FCE, and they are thus at lower risk. Such lower-risk breeds
include Basset hounds and Dachshunds. Instead, these breeds tend to get Type I disk
herniation, a different spinal problem but one at least amenable to surgery.
Most FCE dogs are young adults between the ages of 3 and 6 years. In one study, 61%
were evaluated after some kind exercise injury or trauma. There may be a yelp at the time
of the trauma but the injury is generally not painful. There is about a 50:50 chance that the
lumbar area of the spinal cord will be affected, which means only the rear legs will be
involved. Because the embolism is not generally a symmetrical event, both left and right
may not be equally affected.
Will My Dog Be Okay?
This depends on how much loss of function there is. The good news, as mentioned, is that
the loss of function will not progress; after the first 24 hours, the maximum function loss
has occurred. Your dog may or may not be able to improve (about 74% of dogs in one
study showed some improvement ultimately; other studies show at least 50% of dogs can
recover fully) but be prepared for no improvement and ask yourself what kind of care will
be needed and can your dog get around. Maximum improvement has generally occurred
by 3 weeks after the time of the injury, with some dogs showing some additional slow
improvement over months.
Many dogs are completely paralyzed. See more information on caring for a paralyzed dog.
Many dogs are simply weak in the affected limbs. They may or may not need assistance
in getting around. It all depends on how severe the embolism was and where in the spinal
cord it occurred.
How Can We Be Sure This Was FCE?
Acute neurologic weakness after trauma could also be caused by Type I disk herniation or
by spinal cord trauma. In Type I disk herniation, a mineralized intervertebral disk “slips”
upward and presses on the spinal cord. The pressure may be relieved with medication (if
it is not severe) or surgery may be needed. In either case, the spot where the disk is
pressing is painful, and the pain is an important distinguishing feature. Beyond this, with
disk disease, abnormalities may be seen when the patient’s back is radiographed,
whereas in FCE, the radiographs will appear normal.
In some cases, the collapsed disk spaces are not obvious, and more advanced spinal
cord imaging is needed. A myelogram involves general anesthesia and injecting dye in the
space around the spinal cord. If there is an area of compression, it will be visible, and the
patient can then proceed to surgery. In FCE, there is no such compression.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952058&ind=70&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Underwater tread mill. Photo
courtesy of California Animal
Rehabilitation.
As for acute spinal cord trauma, it may not be apparent whether this or FCE has occurred.
If the lesion is acute, it is not unreasonable to treat it as an acute spinal injury and see if
improvement results.
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is not yet readily available to most veterinary practices
but is likely to become the imaging modality of choice for the diagnosis of FCE. MRI is
able to distinguish embolized areas of the spinal cord from those with swelling or
compression as long as at least 72 hours have elapsed from the initial event. Still,
absolute confirmation of the FCE diagnosis requires a piece of spinal cord tissue for
analysis, and this is not something that would be done in a living patient. For the time
being, diagnosis of FCE is made based on the clinical picture of a patient in the
appropriate age group with an acute spinal deficit, no other abnormalities on imaging, and
no painful areas.
FCE is unlikely to be a recurrent condition, so that if a dog has one episode, they are not
likely to experience another.
Physical Therapy
Physical therapy for pets is an emerging field with limited
availability, but it can be very helpful in maximizing mobility. This
holds true for many orthopedic and spinal conditions, including
FCE. Some of the exercises used to assist in rehabilitation are
depicted in the pictures below.
With any pet physical rehabilitation program, a veterinarian
should be on site to direct the plan of action.
If you need help finding an Animal Rehabilitation Veterinarian in
your area, the American Association of Rehabilitation
Veterinarians (AARV) can help.
Cavaletti poles. Photo courtesy of California Animal
Rehabilitation.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952058&ind=70&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Theraband walk. Photo courtesy of California
Animal Rehabilitation.
Interferential stimulus. Photo courtesy of
California Animal Rehabilitation.
Hip stretch on incline. Photo courtesy of
California Animal Rehabilitation.
Wobble board. Photo courtesy of California
Animal Rehabilitation.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952058&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155536

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952058&ind=70&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:55 PM Fibrocartilaginous Embolism (FCE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952058&ind=70&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: January 01, 2023
Published: January 29, 2007
My Pet Has a Heart Murmur – What Does This Mean?
A heart murmur is one of several types of abnormal sounds your veterinarian can hear
when listening to your pet’s heart with a stethoscope. Normally, two distinct sounds are
heard when listening to the heart of a normal dog or cat. These are often described as
“lub” and “dub." When listening with a stethoscope one hears: Lub-dub...Lub-dub...Lubdub.
A murmur is an abnormal extra sound, which can sometimes drown out the normal
sounds. Murmurs most commonly occur between the “lub” and the “dub” and have a
“shooshing” or “whooshing” quality. (See below for audio files.)
Copyright Veterinary Information Network
What Causes a Heart Murmur?
The short answer to this question is turbulent blood flow. Like the water in a calm river or
stream, normally blood flows through the heart in a quiet, smooth manner – what is called
laminar flow. However, narrowing, rocks, or other obstacles create rapids in rivers or
streams that disrupt this smooth flow, creating turbulence. The same happens with blood
flow through the heart. In a river, the turbulent rapids emit sounds much louder and less
tranquil than the calmer sections of river. In the heart, we hear this turbulence as a
murmur.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952593&ind=71&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Lots of things can cause turbulent flow. To understand what can, we need a brief lesson in
heart anatomy and function.
In the illustration, we see that a dog and cat’s heart has four chambers – two atria and two
ventricles (one of each on each side). Blood initially enters the heart in the right atrium.
The blood then passes through the tricuspid valve into the right ventricle which pumps the
blood through the pulmonic valve into the lungs to pick up oxygen and release carbon
dioxide (among other things). The oxygenated blood then enters the left atrium. Blood in
the left atrium passes through the mitral valve to reach the left ventricle, which then
pumps the blood through the aortic valve out to the rest of the body.
The purpose of each of the valves (tricuspid, pulmonic, mitral, aortic) is to keep the blood
flowing forward, not backward, through the circuit described above (RA->RV-> lung >
LA>LV>body). If a valve malfunctions (e.g., it doesn’t open or close properly), it can
disturb blood flowing through it enough to create turbulence and the result is that your
veterinarian will hear a murmur. The most common murmurs in dogs are associated with
leaky mitral valves.
In other cases, the turbulence develops because there is a hole in the heart between two
chambers or two arteries that are not normally connected; these holes are mostly
ventricular septal defects.
Another cause is a narrowing (stenosis) within a chamber or vessel through which the
blood has to squeeze, like water through a pinched hose.
In other cases, structures within the heart can vibrate as blood flows past them, much like
the strings of a guitar. These types of murmurs are common in children.
Finally, turbulence can be heard when the blood is too thin (anemia) or even when a
patient is very excited, causing the heart to pump faster and harder than normal.
Are Different Types of Murmurs Associated With Specific Diseases or Conditions?
Sometimes. Murmurs are caused by different structures inside and outside the heart. Your
veterinarian can use various clues about the murmur to try to determine what the likely
origin is. Specifically, veterinarians will use the timing of the murmur (when in relation to
the "lub" and "dub' of each heartbeat the murmur is heard), the location on the patient’s
chest where the murmur can be heard, and, sometimes, the “quality” of the murmur. For
example, murmurs on the lower left of an older dog’s chest are most likely associated with
degenerative mitral valve disease. Murmurs associated with patent ductus arteriosus are
continuous when auscultated in the left armpit. Murmurs of aortic stenosis can sometimes
radiate up the carotid arteries and be heard over the neck. Murmurs associated with
ventricular septal defects tend to be loudest on the right side (as are murmurs associated
with leaky tricuspid valves).
However, in many cases, these clues are insufficient for the veterinarian to make a
diagnosis. This is especially the case in cats, where most murmurs are heard near the
sternum.
What is a Benign or “Innocent” Murmur?
Some heart murmurs are called benign (or innocent or physiological), meaning there is no
apparent heart disease that explains the murmur. These murmurs are often seen in
puppies and can occur in cats of any age. They are uncommon in adult dogs. Benign
murmurs are usually soft (rather than loud) and can be intermittent. Benign puppy
murmurs will generally disappear by 12 to 15 weeks of age. Murmurs associated with
anemia or excitement are also considered benign murmurs.
What is a Congenital Murmur vs. an Acquired Murmur?

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952593&ind=71&objTypeID=1007 2/5
A congenital murmur is a murmur in a pet that is present from birth or near it. Congenital
murmurs are associated with heart defects that the pet was born with. However,
sometimes puppies aren't examined by a veterinarian, or a congenital murmur is
overlooked in a puppy and the murmur and defect are first detected later in life.
An acquired murmur is a murmur that a pet acquires during their life. These can be
benign, but more often (especially in dogs) are associated with developing heart disease.
My Pet’s Murmur Has a Grade. What Does This Mean?
Murmur grading is simply your veterinarian’s way of describing the loudness of a murmur.
Most veterinarians grade murmurs on a scale from 1 to 6. The lower the grade, the quieter
the murmur. However, it is often easiest to simply describe them as “soft,” “moderately,”
“loud” or “palpable” (where you can feel the murmur like a vibration through the chest).
There are other terms that a veterinarian will use to describe the character of a murmur –
this helps communicate to other veterinarians the characteristics of the murmur as certain
types of murmurs are more commonly associated with specific heart or valve diseases.
The grade or loudness of the murmur is only sometimes related to the severity of the heart
abnormality causing it.
Bear in mind that grading is subjective because it is based on how it sounds to the
listener. Also, it’s hard to tell if an animal has a heart murmur if the pet is excited or
anxious because rapid breathing sounds can mimic a murmur.
What Should I Do if My Pet Has a Murmur?
Dogs
In many cases, a veterinarian will be confident diagnosing the origin of a murmur in a dog
based on the age, breed, medical history, and physical exam findings, including how the
murmur sounds and where it is heard loudest on the chest. In some cases, based on
these findings and the desires of the patient’s owner, no additional testing will be deemed
necessary at this time. However, to be certain, it is often best to work with your
veterinarian to confirm the origin of the murmur as well as the severity of the condition
causing the murmur. This will give you the best idea of what to expect in the future -- the
prognosis for your pet. This might include a referral to a veterinary cardiologist or another
imaging specialist.
In cases where a pet may be used for breeding, a murmur may indicate the presence of a
hereditary defect that could be passed on to progeny. These pets should be thoroughly
worked up to rule out congenital heart disease or neutered.
Cats
The cause of a cat’s murmur cannot usually be determined by listening alone. In many
cats, benign murmurs can sound exactly like murmurs in a cat with serious heart disease,
and only an echocardiogram can differentiate the two.
In both dogs and cats, your veterinarian may elect to perform chest radiographs (x-rays),
an echocardiogram (ultrasound of the heart), or other imaging studies, or to refer your pet
to a specialist for these procedures. The tests that are performed depend on the individual
case.
How is a Murmur Treated?
The murmur itself is not treated. Your veterinarian might advise treating the underlying
cause of the murmur, depending on the cause, severity, and other circumstances (age,
the well-being of the pet, cost of treatment, etc.). Your veterinarian is best suited to
discuss specific treatment options with you.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952593&ind=71&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Heart Murmur Examples
The following audio files are examples of murmurs. They are best listened to through
headphones.
Normal heart with no murmur:
Carlos Mastin
Soft murmur:
Carlos Mastin
Moderate murmur:
Carlos Mastin
Loud murmur:
Carlos Mastin
(Audio files courtesy of Dr. Clarence Kvart)
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952593&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155562
Soundtrack 15
0s / 15s
Soundtrack 32
0s / 9s
Soundtrack 35
0s / 22s
Soundtrack 36
0s / 23s
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952593&ind=71&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heart Murmurs in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952593&ind=71&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Additional Resources
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Heartworm Preventive Comparison
for Dogs and Cats
Heartworm Treatment for Dogs
Heartworm: The Parasite
Preventing Heartworm Infection in
Dogs
What Happens in Heartworm Disease
Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 15, 2025
Published: January 01, 2001
The chief issue in diagnosing heartworm
disease centers around detecting living
heartworms in the host's body. This
sounds pretty straightforward, but it turns
out that different tests detect different life
stages of heartworm, and not all life
stages may be in a given dog.
Furthermore, different stages require
different treatments. Some tests evaluate
the extent of concurrent heart disease,
while others simply look for worm
proteins. The following is a list of
diagnostic methods that have been and
are used in the detection of heartworms
within the pet dog's body, as well as what information each test provides.
Keep in mind:
Microfilariae are baby worms produced by mating male and female adult worms
living in the heart and pulmonary arteries. Microfilariae circulate freely in the
bloodstream.
Adult worms, as mentioned, live in the heart and pulmonary arteries and do not
circulate around the body.
Direct Blood Smear
While this method is a simple screening test, it is not recommended as a regular test
method. A single drop of blood is examined under the microscope for live microfilariae. If
there are a large number of microfilariae, chances are that at least one will be seen
swimming by. Of course, detection of heartworm larvae in this way requires large numbers
of larvae, as less than 20-50 microfilariae per ml of blood will not be detected. More subtle
infections will be missed.
Difil Test and Knott’s Test
These tests represent concentration methods to detect microfilariae so that more subtle
infections can be detected. In these tests, more blood is either centrifuged or filtered to
concentrate any microfilariae. When a microfilaria test needs to be done, either of these
would be appropriate.
Antigen testing had largely supplanted microfilaria testing as simple antigen test kits
became available but more recently, The American Heartworm Society has revised its
guidelines, now recommending that microfilaria testing be included in basic heartworm
testing for all dogs being tested for heartworm. Expect that either Knott's or Difil testing to
be included in basic heartworm test screening tests.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951485&ind=72&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Photo by MarVistaVet
Dipetalonema Reconditum: The other Microfilaria
Heartworm is not the only species of worm that has circulating microfilariae as a firststage larva. There is another parasite called Dipetalonema reconditum which may be
picked up by the microfilaria tests. This parasite is transmitted by fleas.
Subtle differences in the swimming characteristics, nose structure, and tail structure can
be used to distinguish this harmless larva from the more serious heartworm microfilaria.
Before immunotechnology, there was an element of diagnostic challenge when
microfilariae were detected in the blood; was the nose the shape that would justify a harsh
and possibly life-threatening treatment for heartworm infection or was it a harmless
creature for which no treatment was needed? The advent of antigen testing has made this
distinction much easier to make.
Antigen Testing: The Test of Choice for Dogs (Can only detect young adult female worms)
Using genetic engineering, it has become possible to
create extremely sensitive tests capable of detecting
tiny pieces of adult female heartworm skin circulating
in the blood. (Technology exists only to detect female
worm proteins; male worms are undetectable.) In this
way, very small numbers of adult worms can be
detected, even single-worm infections, as long as at
least one female worm is involved.
This kind of testing has made it possible to detect
infections in which no microfilariae are present: the socalled occult infections. Most of these immunological
tests are available as test kits that can be performed in
the veterinarian's office while you wait.
No Microfilariae?
There are many important reasons why a dog might be
infected with adult heartworms yet no microfilariae can
be detected:
Single-sex infections or single-worm infections
Younger female worms tend to be resistant to the drugs used to clear adult
worms. This means that after the first treatment with anti-heartworm
medication, a group of young female worms might survive.
If antigen testing is not performed, one could be misled into thinking that the
infection has been completely cleared. It is also worth noting that a single-sex
population with male worms not only will not produce microfilariae but will not
be detectable even with antigen testing.
Immunologic destruction of microfilariae
In cats, the period in which microfilariae can be detected in the bloodstream is
extremely short as the immune system rapidly groups and clears these larval
worms.
The dog is taking heartworm prevention medication.
Heartworm preventive medications are able to kill circulating microfilariae (but not adult
heartworms). If, for some reason, a dog is not properly tested and has missed a dose of
medication, it is possible for an infection to establish yet no microfilariae will be detected.
People commonly ask why they must continue annual testing in animals that are on
preventive medication; this is one reason.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951485&ind=72&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Since Dipetalonema microfilariae can be mistaken for heartworm larvae and since
microfilariae can be transferred to unborn puppies (adult heartworms cannot), many
specialists feel that no microfilaria-positive dog should be treated for heartworm without a
positive antigen test.
The newest recommendation by the American Heartworm Society is for dogs to
be tested annually with both an antigen test and a microfilaria test. Antigen
testing alone is not adequate.
Any dog testing antigen positive should be confirmed with either a microfilaria
test or another type of antigen test before proceeding with treatment.
Antibody Testing: Especially Important for Cats
Antigen tests have limited usefulness when it comes to infections involving only a few
worms. One problem is that the antigens detected by antigen tests are unique to female
worms; animals infected with only male worms will test antigen negative. To get around
these limitations, antibody tests have been developed to detect the host's immune
response against the parasite. This kind of breakthrough has been especially important in
testing in cats because feline heartworm infections typically only involve one or two
worms. Antibody testing may be able to detect infection sooner than can antigen testing,
and infections involving only male worms can be readily detected. As a general rule,
testing for dogs involves an antigen test and a microfilaria test, while testing for cats
involves an antibody test plus an antigen test.
How Often Should a Dog Be Tested?
With differences in weather patterns every year (early spring one year, late freeze another,
etc.), it becomes difficult to figure out in what month heartworm preventive medication
should be initiated. If there is any question about when the last possible transmission date
was in the previous season, it is probably a good idea to simply test the dog annually. The
American Heartworm Society recommends annual testing as this allows the infection to be
detected most promptly, thus minimizing damage to the pet from the infection.
If there is any question about the dog spitting out any preventive tablets last season, then
the dog should be tested before beginning prevention the next season.
If a dog lives in an area considered not to have heartworm and travels to an area that is
considered to have heartworm, both microfilaria and antigen testing should be performed
at least seven months after the last day the dog was in the heartworm-endemic area.
For more information on the different medications used in the prevention of heartworm
infection, see heartworm prevention.
Radiographs and Ultrasound
In areas where heartworm infection is not common, routine testing is not performed, and
infection is unlikely to be detected until the dog is sick. In these cases, the infection is
picked up during a work-up for heart disease.
Radiographs can be strongly indicative of heartworm infection if they show certain
problems in the right side of the heart (blunted tortuous pulmonary arteries and
enlargement), which is the side doing all the extra work to pump blood past the worms.
Ultrasound cannot only measure the thickening of the right side of the heart but also show
live worms wiggling.
When imaging tests are consistent with heartworm disease, antigen and/or microfilaria
testing would be the obvious next step.
See heartworm treatment.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951485&ind=72&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Because of the five-month minimum migration time of the larval heartworm after
infection, it is useless to test dogs younger than five months of age for
heartworm. These puppies are too young to have adult heartworms and are too
young to test positive under any circumstances.
Related resources
Heartworm Infection in Cats - May 26, 2025
Heartworm: The Parasite - April 4, 2024
Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - November 29, 2023
Heartworm Disease in Dogs: You are being redirected to updated information on this topic -
August 17, 2023
Heartworm Preventive Comparison Chart for Dogs and Cats - April 11, 2023
Preventing Heartworm Infection in Dogs - August 7, 2019
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951485&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155592
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:56 PM Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951485&ind=72&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Additional Resources
Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and
Cats
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Heartworm Preventive Comparison
for Dogs and Cats
Heartworm: The Parasite
Preventing Heartworm Infection in
Dogs
What Happens in Heartworm Disease
Heartworm Treatment for Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 29, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
It has been said that the treatment of
heartworm infection is something of an
art. Several strategies can be used
depending on the dog's medical condition,
including the option of not treating at all.
The important concept to realize is that,
while there are off-label alternative
heartworm-killing protocols, the FDAapproved method of killing adult
heartworms involves very harsh arsenicbased drugs, and killing large adult
heartworms is neither simple nor safe.
Let's review some of the dangers and
options in clearing the body of this
parasite.
Patient Evaluation
Before therapy, the heartworm patient is assessed and rated for risk into one of four
categories. Important factors include how many worms are thought to be present based
on the tests performed, the size of the dog, the age of the dog, concurrent health factors,
the severity of the heart disease, and the degree to which exercise can be restricted in the
recovery period. Some hospitals use computerized formulas to categorize heartworminfected patients. The categories into which patients are grouped are as follows:
Class I: Lowest Risk. These dogs are typically without symptoms, and their
infection is a surprise discovery during a routine annual health examination when a
positive test comes up. Other blood tests are normal, and radiographs show mild
changes, if any change at all.
Class II: Moderately
Affected. Healthy dogs with
minimal signs as above,
occasional coughing, and
fatigue only with exercise but
with radiographs that show
definite evidence of heart
disease. Lab testing shows
mild anemia, and urine
dipsticks show some protein
present but not severe urinary
protein loss.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Class I: Lowest Risk. These dogs are typically without symptoms,
and their infection is a surprise discovery during a routine annual
health examination when a positive test comes up. Other blood tests
are normal, and radiographs show mild changes if any change at all.
Chest radiograph from a mildly affected dog. Photo courtesy of VIN.
Class III: Severely Affected. The dog is suffering from weight loss,
cough, difficulty breathing, and blatant damage to the vasculature is
apparent on radiographs, lab work reveals a more severe anemia and
marked urinary protein loss. The damage to the lung blood vessels
from the worms creates extra resistance for the heart to pump
against, and often episodes of collapse occur with exercise. If the
damage is severe enough, the heart can actually fail to pump
through all the clogged-up blood vessels. Class III dogs are expected
to die without treatment but are, unfortunately, sick enough that
treatment itself is not without risk. Chest radiograph from a severely
affected dog. Photo courtesy of VIN
Class III: Severely Affected.
Dogs suffer from weight loss,
cough, difficulty breathing, and
blatant damage to the
vasculature, which is apparent
on radiographs; lab work
reveals a more severe anemia
and marked urinary protein
loss. The damage to the lung
blood vessels from the worms
creates extra resistance for
the heart to pump against, and
often, episodes of collapse
occur with exercise.
If the damage is severe
enough, the heart can fail to
pump through all the cloggedup blood vessels. Class III
dogs are expected to die
without treatment but are,
unfortunately, sick enough that
treatment itself is not without
risk.
Class IV: Caval Syndrome.
Dogs collapse in shock, and
dark brown urine is evident.
Heartworms are visible by
ultrasound in the AV valve of
the right side of the heart, with
very abnormal bloodwork. These dogs are dying and can only be saved by the
physical removal of adult heartworms via an incision through the jugular vein. If such
a dog can be saved from this crisis, further treatment cannot be contemplated until
the dog is stable enough to fit into one of the other categories above.
After knowing what class the patient fits in, treatment can be determined. The dog has
three groups of heartworms in their body: microfilariae (basically newborn worms whose
parents are living inside the dog in question), newly arrived immature worms (relatively
fresh from the mosquito bite and living in the skin tissues), and adult worms themselves.
Microfilariae are the first-stage larvae (basically the youngest stage). These are the
children of the adult worms living in the heart and blood vessels. The mother worm
gives live birth (no eggs involved), and the babies swim freely in the host's
bloodstream. They must be killed so that they cannot be picked up by mosquitos
and transmitted to new dogs.
The newly arrived heartworm larvae have been freshly delivered from mosquito bites
in the last three months. These are third and fourth-stage larvae living in the skin.
For practical purposes, the L5 larvae are included in this group. The L5s are old
enough to leave the skin tissues and enter the circulation, but they are not mature
enough to be called adults. This group of young worms (L3s and L4s in the skin and
L5s in the circulation) represents the first five to seven months of infection. These
should be killed before they reach maturity and begin to wreak havoc on the
cardiovascular system of the host.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Larva climbing into skin. Graphic by
MarVistaVet.
A heart with heartworms. Graphic by
MarVistaVet.
The older L5 larvae and adult worms live inside the
heart and pulmonary arteries. This group requires
the arsenic compounds for destruction, while the
other two groups can be killed with less toxic
products.
After Staging
After knowing what Class the patient fits in, treatment
can be determined. The goal is to get rid of all three
groups of worms with as little inflammatory reaction as
possible. Since the adult worms are the largest, it is not
surprising that their deaths generate the most
inflammation. The hope is to stage the worm-killing
process so that when the time comes to kill the adult
worms, there are as few adult worms as possible, and
the patient should be as healthy as possible while going into the process. For the sake of
terminology, adulticides are products that kill adult worms, and larvicides kill immature
worms.
Stabilization First
Discuss exercise restrictions needed before, during, and
after treatment with your veterinarian. Expect strict
exercise restriction to be needed after adulticide therapy.
Some dogs will need anti-inflammatory doses of steroids
to control the inflammation that stems from the presence
of worms. This is often done concurrently with the second
step, as described below.
Killing the Microfilaria and Migrating Worms
The next step in treatment is clearing the migrating
immature worms. Heartworm treatment is a project that
lasts at least a couple of months. Within that time frame,
it is best that immature worms are prevented from
maturing. Since our goal is to have fewer adult worms
when the time comes to kill the adult worms, it is best to
kill the younger worms right off the bat.
The tissue-based L3 and L4 larvae are killed by monthly
macrocyclic lactone-based heartworm preventive products (avermectins and milbemycin).
Killing the L3 and L4 larvae prevents heartworm infection. Some of these products can
also kill circulating microfilariae (which need to pass through a mosquito before becoming
infective to other animals). The only FDA-approved product for killing microfilariae after
adulticide therapy is Advantage Multi®, which contains moxidectin. Other products can be
used for this purpose also, but it should be noted that an anaphylactoid reaction can occur
if a large number of microfilariae are killed rapidly with products such as high-dose
ivermectin (off-label) or high-dose milbemycin (e.g., Interceptor). This problem has not
been noted with Advantage Multi. While low-dose ivermectin products (e.g., Heartgard)
will gradually eliminate microfilariae in most dogs, the package insert discourages it for
this use.
Killing Wolbachia
Wolbachia is a genus of rickettsial organisms (sort of like bacteria, but not exactly)
that live inside heartworms of all developmental stages. Their numbers begin to expand
once the young worms reach their infectious stage. Wolbachia organisms seem to be

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 3/6
protective or beneficial to the heartworms that harbor them, aiding in metabolism and
general worm health. Without Wolbachia colonization, many female worms are not able to
reproduce, and third-stage larvae are not able to infect new hosts.
Wolbachia organisms possess inflammatory surface proteins that are released when adult
worms die or are killed in treatment, and these proteins greatly increase the chances of
severe circulatory reactions in the canine host.
It has been found that killing Wolbachia with an antibiotic such as doxycycline helps treat
the heartworm infection as the Wolbachia can be removed from their heartworm hosts,
thereby weakening the worm and minimizing the release of inflammatory proteins when
the worm finally dies. To minimize reactions, the American Heartworm Society
recommends using doxycycline along with heartworm preventives for a good month as
soon as the diagnosis is made and prior to the use of the arsenic compounds needed to
kill the adults.
Killing the Adult Worms
The only product currently licensed for treating adult heartworms is melarsomine
dihydrochloride (Immiticide or Diroban ). If you follow the manufacturer's
recommendations, treatment can be done in two or three doses, depending on the class
of heartworm infection. Most clinicians, however, opt to treat all patients with the threedose protocol as it creates a more gradual kill of the adult worms (which is safer in terms
of embolism and shock). There is also a less effective two-dose protocol that may still be
used.
The patient receives an intramuscular injection deep in the lower back muscles. This is a
painful injection with a painful substance, and it is common for the patient to be quite sore
at home afterward. Pain medication may be needed. Be careful around the injection site,
as the pet may bite. The site may form an abscess that requires warm compresses.
Approximately 30% of dogs experience some injection site reaction. These generally
resolve in one to four weeks.
In the two-dose protocol, the dog returns for a second injection the next day on the
opposite side of the lower back. In the three-dose protocol, the dog comes back one
month later for two doses 24 hours apart (the first dose kills most or all of the more
sensitive male worms, leaving the female worms to be killed with the next two doses).
Keep in mind that too many worms dying at once can cause problems. The benefit of the
three-dose protocol (sometimes called the split dose protocol) is that the first injection
serves to kill off any older or weaker worms without killing off the stronger, younger ones.
When the two consecutive doses occur one month later, there will be fewer worms dying
at once.
After treatment, the patient must be strictly confined for one month following the final
treatment. There are no walks or running around. The dog must live an indoor life. This is
because embolism, to some degree, is inevitable, and it is important to minimize
embolism-related problems. Exercise increases heart rate and oxygen demand, and the
heart needs to rest during this recovery period.
Watch for:
Coughing
Fever
Nose bleeds
If any of these occur, report them to the veterinarian right away. The most critical period is
seven to 10 days following a melarsomine treatment, but these signs can occur anytime in
the following month.
The "Slow Kill Method" With Ivermectin Only
® ®

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 4/6
Melarsomine treatment is expensive and often out of reach for rescue groups, shelters,
and many individuals. If the dog is stable (Class I), one option is to simply leave the dog
on an ivermectin-based preventive. This option has led to a great deal of misconception
about the ability of ivermectin to kill adult heartworms.
Ivermectin Misconceptions and Rumors:
Ivermectin does not kill adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does shorten the lifespan of adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does sterilize adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does kill microfilaria (keeping the dog from being a source of
contagion).
Ivermectin does kill L3 and L4 larvae (preventing new infections).
This means that if you opt to treat a heartworm-positive dog with only an ivermectin
heartworm preventive, you can expect the dog to remain heartworm-positive for at least
two years, and the heartworm disease will progress during that time. This is not good for
your dog but certainly beats getting no treatment of any kind.
The "Slow Kill Method" With Mox-Dox
Adding doxycycline to ivermectin has changed the way slow kill works. As the "slow kill"
protocol evolved, topical moxidectin has been substituted for ivermectin, and a month of
twice daily doxycycline is used to kill the Wolbachia bacteria that are so protective of the
living heartworms. The result seems to be a much faster slow kill with microfilaria clearing
in three weeks or so (addressing the resistance in microfilaria's slow kill issue). The adult
worms die over three to four months, similar to the three-dose protocol. (One to three
months on preventive, one dose of melarsomine with two doses following a month after
that). Exercise restriction is still needed, and relatively high doses of moxidectin are also
needed. These can be achieved either with topicals such as Advantage Multi (Advocate)
or with long-acting injectable products (ProHeart 12).
In the case of the injectable product, it is given every six months (even though it is
licensed for once-yearly administration). Heartworm antigen testing is performed nine
months after starting the protocol and continued monthly until negative. If the dog is still
heartworm antigen positive after 15 months, new decisions should be made (do mox-dox
again, use melarsomine, etc.). Studies, although relatively small, have suggested similar
effectiveness to melarsomine in rendering dogs “heartworm-free”.
Related resources
Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - July 15, 2025
Heartworm Infection in Cats - May 26, 2025
Heartworm: The Parasite - April 4, 2024
Heartworm Disease in Dogs: You are being redirected to updated information on this topic -
August 17, 2023
Heartworm Preventive Comparison Chart for Dogs and Cats - April 11, 2023
Preventing Heartworm Infection in Dogs - August 7, 2019
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951486&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155625

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 5/6
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951486&ind=73&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 01, 2024
Published: August 07, 2002
High blood pressure is an extremely
important concern in human medicine. A
high stress lifestyle, smoking, and high
salt diet all contribute to this potentially
dangerous condition and virtually
everyone in the U.S. knows how serious it
can be. But what about our pets? They
don’t smoke or worry about the mortgage
and they don’t deposit cholesterol in their
blood vessels. They do, however, get high
blood pressure, especially in old age.
Here is what you should probably know.
What does High Blood Pressure Do?
Problems from high blood pressure arise
when a blood vessel is simply too small
for the high pressure flow going through it.
Imagine attaching a garden hose to a fire
hydrant. The pressure would cause the
garden hose to explode and that is what happens to a blood vessel too small for the
pressure going through it. Instead of water going everywhere, as in the garden hose
analogy, bleeding results. Since the affected vessels are small, the bleeding may not be
noticeable but a lot of little bleeds and a lot of blood vessel destruction can create big
problems over time.
The retina of the eye is especially at risk, with either sudden or gradual blindness often
being the first sign of latent high blood pressure. The kidney also is a target as it relies on
tiny vessels to filter toxins from the bloodstream. Kidney disease is an important cause of
high blood pressure and also progresses far more rapidly with it.
High blood pressure also increases the risk of “embolism:” the formation of tiny blood clots
that form when blood flow is abnormal. These clots can lodge in an assortment of
inopportune locations including the brain.
The heart itself can fall victim to high blood pressure damage as its own tissue can be
damaged, leading to scarring and thus inflexibility of the heart muscle. This is especially a
problem in cats.
What Causes High Blood Pressure in Pets?
There are numerous diseases in pets that are associated with high blood pressure:
Chronic renal (kidney) failure In one study, 93% of dogs with chronic renal
failure and 61% of cats with chronic renal failure also had systemic

8/2/25, 10:57 PM High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951756&ind=74&objTypeID=1007 1/5
hypertension. More recent studies suggest this may be an over-estimation but
the percentages are still significant and patient screening is very important.
Hyperthyroidism In one study, 87% of cats with untreated hyperthyroidism had
systemic hypertension. (Note: hyperthyroidism is a feline disease; dogs are not
affected.)
Glomerular disease is one of the kidney filtration system in which protein is lost
in urine. In this condition, blood proteins are lost into the urine. Hypertension is
associated with this condition and screening blood pressure is important
whenever the kidney is thought to be losing its protein.
Cushing's disease (an adrenal cortisone excess)
Diabetes mellitus (inability to properly reduce blood sugar)
Acromegaly (growth hormone excess)
Polycythemia (an excess in red blood cells)
Pheochromocytoma (an adrenaline secreting tumor of the adrenal gland)
Hyperaldosteronism (an imbalance of hormones that are supposed to regulate
blood pressure)
In humans, high blood pressure is usually considered primary, meaning there is no
underlying disease causing it. In animals, primary hypertension is unusual; there is almost
always another disease causing it and if routine screening does not identify the problem,
more tests may be in order.
How is High Blood Pressure Identified?
In human medicine, high blood pressure is called the silent killer because most people
have no reason to think they might be hypertensive. To find high blood pressure in people,
we screen for it. This means that virtually any time you see a doctor of any kind, a nurse
will take your blood pressure. Similarly, in pets, a great deal of high blood pressure is
identified by screening. If a pet has one of the above conditions, blood pressure is
generally checked. It has recently been recommended that older pets have their blood
pressure checked whenever they have a physical examination. There is some
disagreement among experts as to which patients should be screened. Because of
inherent insensitivity of the equipment commonly used in veterinary practice, not every pet
necessarily needs to be screened. Certainly, any pet with a predisposing condition such
as one of those listed above should be screened. Ask your veterinarian if your senior pet
should get a blood pressure measurement.
The other time high blood pressure is discovered is when it makes its presence known.
This usually means some degree of blindness or some other obvious eye problem. The
retina of a hypertensive patient develops tortuous-looking retinal blood vessels. Some
vessels may even have broken, showing smudges of blood on the retinal surface. Some
areas of the retina simply detach. Sometimes the entire retina detaches. With early
identification, some vision may be restored.
Do not let minor vision changes go unreported. Let your veterinarian know if you
think your pet’s vision is not normal.
Retinal changes can be complicated to interpret. Do not be surprised or alarmed if your
veterinarian recommends referral to a veterinary ophthalmologist.
A sudden neurologic condition could indicate a stroke or vascular accident in the brain or
spinal cord. It used to be taken for granted that dogs and cats did not throw blood clots
and get strokes like human beings can but the advent of MRI technology has shown
otherwise. A sudden neurologic deficit, especially a non-painful one, is another possible
indication to screen blood pressure.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951756&ind=74&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Doppler Blood Pressure Monitor
Photo by MarVistaVet
Also, we can't forget that the heart and kidneys are target organs of disease when it
comes to hypertension. Cats found to have heart disease are typically screened for
hypertension and, of course, patients with chronic kidney disease are routinely checked
for hypertension as it is part of how their disease is staged.
How do we Measure Blood Pressure in Pets?
When a person's blood pressure is checked, the
nurse uses a stethoscope to listen for "Korotkoff
sounds" arise and dissipate as an inflatable cuff
slowly releases over an artery. In animals, the
stethoscope is just not sensitive enough and an
ultrasonic probe must be taped or held over the
artery. Using ultrasound, the sound of the systolic
pressure is converted into an audible signal. It is
not possible to measure diastolic pressure in a pet
without actually placing a catheter inside an artery
so we make do with just a systolic measurement.
In pets, this measurement should not exceed 160.
A reading of 180 is considered by the American
College of Veterinary Internal Medicine to indicate
high risk for organ damage while readings of 150-
159 are considered mildly elevated.
Blood pressure measurement is performed
similarly to the way it is in humans. An inflatable
cuff is fit snuggly around the foot, foreleg, or even
tail of the pet. The cuff is inflated so as to occlude
blood flow through the superficial artery. As the
cuff deflates, the sound of the pulse can be heard
at the point where the systolic pressure is strong
enough to pump past the cuff. Diastolic pressure is not measured.
Some pets (obviously) are nervous at the vet’s office and this factor must be taken into
account when reading blood pressure. It is possible for a pet to have high blood pressure
at the vet’s office and normal pressure at all other times. You might think this would be a
common situation but most pets are able to maintain normal blood pressure despite being
surrounded by hospital staff. To account for the “White Coat Effect,” at least five
measurements are taken so that the pet becomes accustomed to the process and
understands that no pain is involved.
What Treatment is Available for Hypertension?
Ocular disease may require prescription eye drops depending on how much bleeding is in
the eye and whether or not return of vision is likely.
When hypertension is identified, a search for the underlying cause is indicated. It may be
that controlling the underlying disease totally reverses the hypertension (especially true for
hyperthyroid cats).
Beyond these methods, as with people, medication to lower blood pressure is often in
order. This typically involves some type of pill that dilates peripheral blood vessels,
effectively making them larger so as to accommodate the high pressure blood flow going
through them.
Amlodipine is a calcium channel blocker that dilates the systemic arterioles. It is the most
effective drug for treating feline hypertension, with the fewest side-effects. The drug is also
effective in dogs, but literature documentation is lacking. Amlodipine in dogs has always
been expensive, but recently a generic version of the drug has become available, which
should make it more cost effective.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951756&ind=74&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Amlodipine can also be applied transdermally, although the clinical effect may be less
than with orally administered amlodipine.
Angiotensin II Receptor blockers (or ARB's) are a class of hypotensive agent, with
telmisartan, probably being the most common ARB used in veterinary practice.
Angiotensin II is a natural biochemical created by the body in response to a drop in blood
pressure and its effect is to constrict blood vessels and raise blood pressure strongly.
Obviously this is not a biochemical a hypertensive patient needs so it should not be
surprising that blocking its activity helps treat hypertension.
Sometimes a combination of medications is needed before high blood pressure can be
controlled.
Hydralazine is a very effective antihypertensive agent in dogs, but can be associated with
side effects such as reflex tachycardia and gastroinstestinal upset.
Prazosin has also been used as a vasodilator.
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACE-I) do not appear to be very effective in
reducing blood pressure in hypertensive dogs or cats. Beta blockers and diuretics are
similarly unimpressive in reducing blood pressure in these species as sole agents.
However, beta blockers may be used as adjunctive agents when reflex tachycardia occurs
following the use of a vasodilator or if a patient is not responding well to a vasodilator.
Salt restriction in the diet is controversial; it seems to make sense but there is not enough
data at present to whole-heartedly recommend it. Certainly, if there is kidney disease
present the recommendation is less equivocal as these low salt diets are designed with
other features more specifically for kidney disease. This generally means a dry or canned
formula prescription diet if the pet will eat it or a diet limited to dry food if the pet will not
accept prescription food.
Appropriate home cooked diets may be designed by a veterinary nutritionist or through the
public site at www.balanceit.com. Several places provide such services through veterinary
teaching hospitals or private endeavors.
After hypertension is controlled, patients should be rechecked every two to four months to
keep their blood pressure in a healthy range.
Research on this Topic
Effect of Control of Systolic Blood Pressure of Survival in Cats with Systemic
Hypertension. Jepson, R.E., Elliott, J., Brodbelt, D., Syme H.M. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine 2007; 21: 402-409.
In this study 141 pet cats with high blood pressure were studied. In these cats, 87% were
found to have either evidence of renal failure (increased BUN or creatinine tests) or
hyperthyroidism or both. Amlodipine besylate was used to treat hypertension in these cats
and in 50% of the cats, the initial dose eventually proved inadequate and an increase was
necessary. Blood pressure was stabilized within one to two recheck visits for 96% of cats,
with a median time of 20 days required to achieve blood pressure stabilization. Blood
pressure was more difficult to control in the long term for cats with higher urinary protein
loss.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024

8/2/25, 10:57 PM High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951756&ind=74&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951756&pid=19239
caac649b-c9df-4797-a628-4bbc65a74758.1754155650
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:57 PM High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4951756&ind=74&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: November 13, 2024
Published: April 25, 2018
Myxomatous mitral valve disease (MMVD, also called chronic mitral valve disease,
degenerative mitral valve disease, mitral insufficiency, and endocardiosis) is the most
common cardiac condition seen in dogs. It is mostly, but not exclusively, a disease of
smaller breed dogs and is seen in middle-aged or geriatric dogs. Rarely is it seen in cats.
(Cats will not be discussed further in this article.)
MMVD is caused by as-yet unidentified processes that lead to degeneration of the mitral
valves, the valves on the left side of the heart between the left atrium and left ventricle.
The degenerative process causes the valves to thicken and retract, creating a hole
through which blood can flow back from the left ventricle into the left atrium when the left
ventricle contracts. The mitral chordae tendinae (think of them as mooring lines for the
valve) can tear, causing the valve to flop around rather than sealing off the left atrium from
the left ventricle (as shown in the animation/graphic to the right). If severe enough, this
leak can cause left-sided congestive heart failure (CHF).
Approximately 10 percent of older small-breed dogs have MMVD. Some breeds are
predisposed and get more progressive and earlier forms of MMVD. The breed most
studied with MMVD is the Cavalier King Charles spaniel, mostly because it is popular
(especially in Scandinavia) and because it develops MMVD at a relatively early age, often
by four years old.
The good news is that although the disease is common, approximately 75 percent of dogs
that develop MMVD will ultimately die of something else because the disease progresses
slowly in many dogs. It’s sort of like prostate cancer in old men: it’s not the cancer that kills
them, but other old-age causes. However, that still leaves plenty of older dogs in which the
disease does become clinically important.
Clinical Signs of MMVD
In most cases, MMVD is a surprise for the owner, detected by the veterinarian at a routine
evaluation. As far as the owner is concerned, there was nothing wrong with the dog. And
now they’re being told there’s a problem!
It is true most dogs with MMVD have no clinical signs, especially when the disease is
mild. It is only when the disease progresses to the point of CHF that owners detect a
problem. Occasionally, when picking up the dog, an owner might feel the murmur
associated with the leak on the left side of the chest. It feels like the dog is purring or
vibrating.
Occasionally, dogs with MMVD can faint. In many cases, this is a sign of early CHF, or,
less commonly, pulmonary hypertension. Sometimes, a cause is not found. However, the
good news is that this fainting is considered benign or harmless, even if it does look rather
frightening. And it’s often able to be controlled with corrective measures. Once a dog
develops CHF, clinical signs become obvious.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8526511&ind=75&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Dogs with MMVD that develop CHF can
also develop pulmonary hypertension
because of the valve disease. This is more
common than was originally thought. If a
dog develops severe pulmonary
hypertension, the clinical signs become
different – there can be fainting, shortness
of breath, or even right-sided CHF. To an
unsuspecting clinician, this can be
confusing.
Diagnosing MMVD
In most cases, a veterinarian will
presumptively diagnose MMVD based on
three things:
Higher age
Small-breed dog
Characteristic left-sided murmur
However, it is then worthwhile determining
just how severe the MMVD is. This can
often be done with chest X-rays to look at
the size of the heart and evaluate the lungs.
If a dog is suspected of having CHF, then
chest X-rays are essential.
In some cases, especially if there is some
doubt about the diagnosis or it appears
more complicated than usual, the
veterinarian might recommend or perform
an echocardiogram to better determine the
disease process. In the same way, an
ultrasound is done on pregnant women to
see the fetus, an echocardiogram is a type
of ultrasound done on your dog to see the
heart.
The severity of MMVD is determined by how
much blood is leaking through the valve
back into the left atrium. The bigger the
leak, the bigger the heart, and specifically
the left atrium, gets. Therefore, your
veterinarian should be able to determine the
severity of the disease by assessing left
atrial size, either from the X-rays or from the
echocardiogram.
In general, mild MMVD has no visible
changes on X-rays (or only minor changes),
moderate MMVD has visible enlargement
that is not “overwhelming,” and severe
MMVD has marked cardiomegaly (heart
enlargement). This is important because, in
most cases, CHF only sets in when the
heart is massively enlarged (because the
leak is really big). Occasionally, one of the

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8526511&ind=75&objTypeID=1007 2/5
valve’s mooring lines (chordae tendinae)
can rupture, causing CHF without dramatic
changes in heart size, but this is
uncommon.
The echocardiogram is also useful in
identifying pulmonary hypertension or
ruptured chordae tendinae.
Treatment of MMVD
Treatment of MMVD is directed at two
phases: subclinical and CHF. Treatment
during the subclinical phase is aimed at
slowing down the progression of the
disease to delay the onset of CHF. The ideal
would be to reverse the process or “cure the
valve,” but that’s not really possible. In
humans with mitral valve disease, the valve
is repaired or replaced. This is possible in
dogs, but not commonly done (more later).
Subclinical Treatment
Several drugs have been investigated or are
currently being investigated as disease
retardants – drugs that might slow the
progression of the disease. These include
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors
(ACE inhibitors), pimobendan, and
spironolactone. The only one of these that
has clearly demonstrated the ability to
prolong the time to CHF is pimobendan.
Because many dogs with mild MMVD will
never develop CHF, current
recommendations are to begin pimobendan
when the disease is reasonably apparent on
chest X-rays (suggesting that the dog is
more likely to ultimately develop CHF).
Treating too early might simply be a waste
of money.
Many companies and veterinarians
prescribe sodium-restricted diets, but no
studies have demonstrated their value,
especially in subclinical diseases.
Treatment of CHF
Find details of treating CHF in dogs with MMVD.
Diets
Avoiding high-salt treats is of particular importance in dogs with MMVD. Many small-breed
dogs are spoiled with people food. However, things like cheese, deli meats, chips,
pretzels, etc. are really high in salt. These snacks can cause a dog that has been well
managed with drugs to develop CHF. Because of the propensity for exposure to these
foods at parties, veterinarians have coined the term Super Bowl syndrome!

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8526511&ind=75&objTypeID=1007 3/5
If a dog is difficult to pill, owners will often hide the pills in food. Pills can be hidden in no
salt-added peanut butter. Medications can often be made into palatable liquid formulas by
a compounding pharmacy.
Ask your veterinarian if you need more suggestions.
Activity Restriction?
People often ask how much restriction they should impose on exercise. Some exercise is
good for the dog's well-being and quality of life, but avoid exercise that leads to excessive
panting or weakness.
Other Treatments
In some cases, a dog with MMVD will develop an arrhythmia that requires treatment.
Various drugs can be used, depending on the type of arrhythmia.
Mitral Valve Surgery
Humans with mitral valve disease undergo mitral valve replacement or repair. Studies are
currently underway in dogs to insert prosthetic valves or reduce the size of the leak.
However, these are experimental only, and have had many complications, but show
promise for the future.
However, several cardiovascular surgeons are now performing valve repairs in dogs with
mitral valve disease. These centers are located in Japan, the U.K., and France. The
success rate is quite high, even with severe disease. Interested people should contact the
programs directly for specific requirements.
Monitoring MMVD
Once the diagnosis has been made, the veterinarian might instruct you to monitor your pet
to see if the disease is progressing. If the disease is mild, a recheck might be performed in
six to 12 months. If the disease is more advanced, and there is concern that CHF might
occur in the not-too-distant future, the veterinarian might ask for more frequent re-checks
and have you monitor the pet’s breathing (respiratory rate). This is a cheap and simple
monitoring method. As long as the respiratory rate is normal, things are OK. If, however,
the rate starts to increase, especially while the pet is sleeping, then the pet should see a
veterinarian as soon as possible: it’s generally not an emergency, but the pet should be
seen within 24 hours.
See how to measure the respiratory rate.
If the veterinarian diagnoses CHF, they might perform some bloodwork once treatment
has been instituted to make sure that kidney function is not being overly compromised.
Prognosis
Most dogs with mild MMVD never have a problem with their heart disease. However,
those who develop CHF are destined to die from it. In most studies, 50 percent of dogs
that develop CHF die within nine to 10 months. About 80 percent die before 18 months,
and only a few manage to survive more than two years.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8526511&pid=19239
a7e519ee-5190-4a6e-9c84-655af8ff8aae.1754155675

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8526511&ind=75&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Mitral Valve Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8526511&ind=75&objTypeID=1007 5/5
RA=Right atrial lead, LV = left ventricular
lead placed in a coronary vein, RV = right
ventricular lead. This the most advanced
pacemaker that has three leads, shown
here in a dog; however, most pacemakers
placed will only have the RV lead and work
well improving the quality and longevity of
a patient's life.
Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats
Robert Prošek, DVM, MS, DACVIM, ECVIM-CA
Published: November 04, 2008
Just like people, some pets need a pacemaker to
keep their hearts ticking. This article provides general
information about why a pet might require a
pacemaker, and how pacemakers are implanted.
Why Would my Pet Need a Pacemaker?
Normally, the heart sends a repetitive electrical signal
through its muscle cells, which stimulates the muscle
to contract and pump blood through the body, much
like a car's spark-plugs provide the spark that
ultimately causes the pistons to move. This signal is
carefully coordinated and regulated.
Occasionally, however, the signal is disrupted. Heart
block and sick sinus syndrome are the two most
common causes of such a disruption, resulting in
erratic discharge of the signal or a complete failure of
it. This disruption causes a slow heart rate because
without the regular spark-plug, “emergency lifesupport back-up systems” take over to keep the heart
beating enough to stay alive.
When such a disruption occurs, the pet usually develops exercise intolerance, collapses
or faints. Because many of these pets are older, owners sometimes attribute more subtle
signs of slowing down to aging when in fact it is due to a slow heart rate.
The solution for these pets is to “rewire” their heart with a pacemaker that provides the
regular electrical signals. Almost universally, pets needing a pacemaker improve clinically
(often quite dramatically) once the pacemaker is implanted and adjusted. Without a
pacemaker, clinical signs often worsen, and the pets usually succumb to their disease
within 1 to 2 years. Pacemakers can often extend this survival by several years,
depending on the overall health of the pet.
Non-related disease usually does not prevent use of a pacemaker.
What is a Pacemaker and how is it Placed?
A pacemaker is made up of a pulse generator (a small computer and battery) and
specialized wires called pacing leads. The pulse generator is about the size of a silver
dollar, only thicker, and contains an energy supply and a computer that monitors and
controls the rhythm of the heart. The leads transmit electrical impulses in both directions
between the pulse generator and the heart, so that the pulse generator “knows” when to
send an impulse and when to wait.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952813&ind=76&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Pacemakers used in pets are identical to those used in people; the only difference is that
they are usually obtained from the manufacturer after the shelf-life of the power source
has decreased below acceptable limits for use in people. Because of the generally shorter
life span of animals, these pacemakers can be successfully implanted in pets at a
substantially lower cost than if a new pacemaker was being implanted; new pacemakers
in people cost upward of $10,000, while those in pets are often around 10% of this cost.
The pacemaker lead is typically placed through the jugular vein in the right side of the
neck, down into the inside of the heart and attached the heart wall. Occasionally, the
pacemaker lead may be placed through the diaphragm and attached to the outside of the
heart; this method is mainly used in cats. Some dogs may have one pacing lead, while
others will have multiple pacing leads, depending on the heart problem and the size of the
patient. The type of pacemaker used, its placement, and number of pacing leads is
decided by the cardiologist implanting the system. If the lead is placed through the jugular
vein, the pulse generator is placed in a pocket under the skin – usually on the side of the
neck. If the lead is placed through the diaphragm, the pulse generator is attached to the
inside of the abdominal wall.
Prior to anesthesia but while under sedation, a temporary pacemaker is placed so that the
pet’s heart rate can be controlled during anesthesia. Since this is a modestly risky
procedure, complications can occur. These include problems under anesthesia, such as
abnormal heart rhythms, puncture of the heart or vessels, infection, or rarely death during
the procedure. Once the pacemaker is implanted, it may stop functioning if the pacing
lead becomes dislodged, or the strength of the impulse provided by the generator is too
low. Most of these problems can be corrected.
What Special Care is Needed once my Pet comes Home?
Initially, rest and recuperation are advised while the pacemaker and the lead “heal” into
place. After a couple of weeks, the stitches are removed, and normal activity can be
resumed. Usually at this time, the pacemaker is adjusted to provide an appropriate signal
(not too big as that would waste battery power and not too small as that could fail to
stimulate the heart). This adjustment is done by the cardiologist using a device that
checks the pulse generator through the skin. It is completely painless.
Occasionally, a swelling develops over the site where the pulse generator has been
implanted. If this occurs, consult the cardiologist who implanted the pacemaker. Under
no circumstances should your local veterinarian address this issue without consulting the
cardiologist. It is usually a simple problem to deal with, if handled correctly.
While petting, you will be able to feel the pacemaker under the skin; it feels like a flat hard
metal disc. It's usually located on the side of the neck or over the shoulder blade.
What Should Pets with Pacemakers Avoid?
Microwaves are not a danger to your dog (microwave energy can sometimes cause
undesirable currents to flow in the pacemaker's electric leads, but generally dogs are not
tall enough to be affected). However, if your dog has a pacemaker and requires advanced
imaging, such as a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), it is important to notify the
cardiology service before the scan because the MRI will negatively affect the pacemaker.
There may be precautions that can be taken to either shield the pacemaker, or know that
it will temporarily "malfunction" if going into an MRI. It is probably best for the cardiology
department to determine the risk on a case-by-case basis.
Dogs with pacemakers should avoid metal detectors, and strong electrical or magnetic
fields of any sources (i.e. power plants, junk yards). In addition, cell phones should be
kept at least a minimum of 6 inches away from the pacemaker generator at all times to
avoid interference, even when the phone is turned off.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952813&ind=76&objTypeID=1007 2/3
With rare exceptions, bumping the pacemaker won't affect it, so don't be afraid to let your
dog play as desired.
How often does my Pet Need to be Examined?
Rechecks to evaluate pacemaker function and battery life are usually performed several
times in the weeks following pacemaker implantation and then yearly. Additional rechecks
are recommended at your doctor’s discretion, or if your dog becomes weak or collapses.
(Co-authored by Herbert Maisenbacher, VMD, DACVIM-Cardiology and Mandi Schmidt,
DVM)
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952813&pid=19239
a7e519ee-5190-4a6e-9c84-655af8ff8aae.1754155701
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Pacemakers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952813&ind=76&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Labrador retrievers are a breed with a higher risk of getting a PDA.
Photo courtesy of Depositphotos.
Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: June 26, 2019
Published: June 18, 2018
Patent ductus arteriosus, often
called PDA, is one of the most
common congenital heart defects in
dogs.
In adult mammals, the heart is one
organ but has two separate sides
that are not supposed to connect
other than by vessels. All the parts
in both sides are encased in one
small sac called the pericardium.
The right side pumps blood to the
lungs through the pulmonary artery
where it picks up oxygen, and then
the oxygenated blood goes to the
left side via the pulmonary veins
from which it is pumped back to the
body via the aorta.
While in the womb, though, it doesn’t work that way because the fetus doesn’t breathe in
oxygen yet. A developing fetus depends on the umbilical circulation to pick up oxygen
from the mother and provide it to the growing body. Because the lungs are still developing
in the womb and are full of fluid, blood vessels growing there are relatively
underdeveloped as there’s little reason to send a lot of blood to the lungs.
Thus, in all mammals the developing fetus has a short bypass vessel called the ductus
arteriosus, which is similar to a shunt, and is a wide-open, low-resistance channel in which
blood coming from the right side of the heart through the first part of the pulmonary artery
is diverted from the lungs directly into the aorta and then out to the body. Of course, a
small volume of blood goes to the lungs because they need nutrients and oxygen to grow,
and that blood goes from the lungs into the left heart.
When the baby is born, that first breath of air fills the lungs with oxygen and inflates them.
Blood can now circulate through inflated lungs to deliver oxygen to the rest of the body.
The pressure in the pulmonary circulation plummets, and blood now prefers to flow out to
the lungs. The bypass system (the ductus arteriosus) is no longer needed or used.
Meanwhile, oxygen and other hormones cause the ductus arteriosus to close almost
immediately; the ductus is lined with muscles that squeeze down and “lock” in that
position. This squeezing ultimately fuses the ductus lining to create a ligamentum: in other
words, the tube becomes a ligament! In most animals, the ductus closes within the first
three days of life and is securely closed by day 7 to 10.
After it closes, the lungs work the way they should for the rest of the mammal’s life:

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8604573&ind=77&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Blood flows from the right side of the heart through the pulmonary artery
Then it goes to the lungs to pick up oxygen
While in the lungs, it also gets rid of carbon dioxide
It goes back to the left side of the heart through the pulmonary veins
Then it goes through the aorta to deliver the oxygen to the body.
At least, that’s what happens to a normal, healthy ductus arteriosus.
Sometimes, however, the ductus
arteriosus fails to close and become
a ligament. “Patent” means open,
so a patent ductus arteriosus
remains open after it should have
closed. In dogs, this closure usually
fails because the muscles in it
formed incorrectly and cannot
squeeze it shut. Now that the
ductus is open, and the lungs have
blood flowing through them, blood
shunts across the PDA from the
aorta to the pulmonary artery
(remember that in utero it went the
other way, from the pulmonary
artery to the aorta). This happens
because the resistance (and
pressure) in the pulmonary artery is
much lower than in the aorta – and
blood flows along the path of least
resistance. Of course, some blood
still flows out to the body – it has to,
so that the baby doesn’t die. To compensate for this “perceived” decrease in blood going
out to the body, the baby starts to retain fluid to increase the blood volume and
compensate for that amount being “lost” through the shunt. A continuous murmur can
usually be heard on the left side because flow through the shunt is turbulent. This type of
flow, called a left-to-right shunt, causes heart problems. The puppy or kitten with this
condition now has a heart defect that can lead to heart failure.
Resulting Problems
If some of the blood destined to provide oxygen to muscles, brain, gut, etc. gets diverted
and goes back through the lungs, the body gets upset and starts to retain fluid. This
retention causes an increase in blood volume so that the left heart can still pump enough
blood out to the body. However, this additional blood volume increases the size of the left
heart because it has to pump both the blood destined to go out to the body and the blood
that is destined to go through the shunt (which essentially gets wasted in a pointless loop).
The heart can only get so big, and, if the shunt is big enough, it eventually hasproblems
dealing with the extra blood; the pulmonary vein pressure increases to the point that fluid
starts to leak into the lungs, causing pulmonary edema, or “fluid in the lungs,” and is
commonly referred to as left-sided congestive heart failure (CHF). The probability of
developing CHF with a left-to-right shunt (there are others than just PDA) depends on the
size of the defect and how much blood is going through the shunt back to the lungs.
A small shunt is easily dealt with. A big shunt can be rapidly lethal.
Affected pets may not have any signs or they may be short of breath, exercise intolerant,
or experiencing a failure to thrive or exercise-induced collapse.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8604573&ind=77&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Pomeranians are another breed at higher risk for
having a PDA. Photo by Dr. Carol Hershey
If your pet has heart failure, that will need to be controlled with medication before surgery
is possible.
The Rare Cases of Right-to-Left Shunting
A rare variant of the PDA is one in which the blood continues to flow after birth as it did
during fetal development: from the pulmonary artery into the aorta and out to the body.
Only now it isn’t carrying oxygen from the placenta, but delivering oxygen-depleted blood
back to the body without picking up oxygen in the lungs. This type of PDA is called a
reverse ductus or a right-to-left shunting PDA.
Generally, this happens in the first few weeks of life, where initial left-to-right flow changes
direction after a few weeks. The reason for this is that the PDA is quite big, allowing a lot
of blood to pass from the aorta to the lungs for a week or two. However, the lungs don’t
like all this extra blood and start to clamp down on the pulmonary vessels, increasing
pulmonary arterial resistance (creating high blood pressure). But they can’t limit how much
they clamp down the pulmonary arteries, and eventually, the resistance in what should be
a low-resistance circuit increases above that in the aorta’s high-resistance circuit. When
that happens, it’s easier for blood to flow across the PDA from the pulmonary artery into
the aorta than into the lungs!
Diagnosing a PDA
A left-to-right PDA can usually be diagnosed by
your veterinarian just listening carefully. The
PDA has a characteristic murmur that is often
described as sounding like a washing
machine because the murmur’s sound is
continuous. It’s continuous because flow through
the PDA goes on all the time, not just at certain
parts of the cardiac cycle. However, a PDA can
be missed if the veterinarian does not listen in
the correct location. The murmur of a PDA is
best heard with the stethoscope positioned in
the patient’s left “arm pit,” way forward of the
usual place where veterinarians usually listen to
the heart.
An increased index of suspicion exists for
breeds of dogs with a known predisposition to
PDA. PDA occurs more often in female purebred
dogs. The Maltese, Pomeranian, Shetland
sheepdog, English springer spaniel,
American cocker spaniel, keeshonden, bichon
frise, German shepherd dog, collie, Irish setter,
Kerry blue terrier, Labrador retriever,
Newfoundland, miniature and toy poodle,
Chihuahua, and Yorkshire terrier are at increased risk.
The work-up to confirm a ductus might include chest radiographs to rule out fluid buildup
in the lungs from heart failure and to look for characteristic enlargement of the aorta and
the left side of the heart where the extra blood volume is contained. However,
echocardiography clinches the diagnosis as all the chamber sizes are measured and the
patent ductus can actually be seen. Furthermore, echocardiography enables additional
congenital heart defects to be discovered as it is not unusual for a puppy or kitten to have
more than one. And finally, echocardiography can help determine the best way to treat the
PDA.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8604573&ind=77&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Unlike the usual left-to-right shunting PDA, which has a loud continuous murmur, a rightto-left shunting PDA is silent. It has no murmur, and clinicians will not hear it. It is usually
suspected because the patient starts to show signs of hind-end weakness with minimal
exercise at a young age. This is because the muscles in the hind limbs are being fed with
deoxygenated blood, so the animal develops cramps and weakness; the ductus is
downstream of all the vessels going to the head. The front limbs are spared in most cases
because of the anatomical location of the PDA.
A right-to-left shunting PDA is generally diagnosed by specialized echocardiographic
evaluations, including something called a bubble study (contrast echocardiogram).
Treatment
It’s best not to wait until the pet is an adult or seriously ill to begin treatment because
without it, about 2/3 of affected puppies will die before they are a year old. Additionally, the
older the animal at the time of correction, the more friable (crumbles easily) the PDA is
and the riskier the procedure.
Left-to-Right PDA
There are multiple ways to treat the more common left-to-right shunting PDA. If the PDA is
small, a cardiologist might elect to do nothing because it will not cause any problems over
the life of a dog or cat (in humans, other long-term complications come into consideration
when deciding whether to close a PDA). If the PDA is large enough, then several options
exist to close it.
Surgery
Ligation is the traditional method of repair. The chest is opened and a piece of suture is
used to tie off the patent ductus. This procedure is not something most general
practitioners are likely to attempt or feel comfortable with, as this extremely delicate
operation usually requires a specialist surgeon. Talk with your veterinarian about whether
a referral to a cardiovascular surgeon is in your pet’s best interest. The complication rate
is less than five percent with less than two percent requiring a second procedure due to
re-opening of the ductus. However, it does require open-chest surgery.
Surgery is the method generally chosen for PDA repair in cats because of their body size
and the size of their vessels.
Endovascular Occlusion
In dogs (as in humans), the most common option today is to deploy a device via the aorta
into the PDA to plug it up. Indeed, one of the devices is known as the Amplatzer Vascular
Plug! (See a video about ihow it works.) Originally, small coils were used, and
occasionally still are. These are positioned inside the PDA and cause a clot to form
around them, plugging up the PDA. More recently a specific device, the Amplatzer Canine
Ductal Occluder (ACDO) has been developed for use in dogs. This device works like a
two-sided umbrella that is opened up inside the PDA with a part of the device on each
side of the PDA opening. It fits snuggly in the PDA and causes almost immediate clotting
within the PDA, stopping the shunting of blood.
Complications rates with occlusion devices are similar to or lower than with surgery and
have much lower morbidity (sickness) because no surgery is required – only a catheter
that is introduced through the femoral artery to deploy the device. However, in some
cases, it (endovascular occlusion with a catheter) is not feasible, specifically if the PDA is
very large or in toy breed dogs that are too small at less than five pounds.
Reverse PDA

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8604573&ind=77&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Surgery is not an option for a right-to-left PDA. You can’t correct the defect in these cases.
The only treatments are directed at the secondary complications. With right-to-left
shunting, the body has an oxygen debt. Its response is to produce more red blood cells,
resulting in a condition called polycythemia. With more red blood cells in the blood, the
blood becomes thicker and more viscous, and has difficulty flowing. In dogs, this can lead
to seizures. Therefore, the treatment is aimed at decreasing the number of red blood
cells, either by “blood-letting,” to use a medieval term – literally removing some blood and
replacing it with saline – or by giving drugs that interfere with red cell production.
However, these are palliative measures as the dog will never be normal and will likely
succumb to the disease at around 5 to 6 years of age.
Outcomes
If surgery for a left-to-right shunting PDA is successful, the dog should be able to lead a
normal life. This is one congenital heart defect that is essentially curable, even if treated
later in life, assuming the dog lives that long. The sooner it is treated, the better: in most
cases, cardiologists will correct PDAs within the first 6to 12 months of life. Indeed, the
longer you wait to correct a PDA, the more difficult it can be because they become more
fragile and can tear more easily. If your pet has irreversible damage before the surgery, it
may need medication for the rest of its life.
Dr. Wendy Brooks contributed to this article.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8604573&pid=19239
a7e519ee-5190-4a6e-9c84-655af8ff8aae.1754155730
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:58 PM Patent Ductus Arteriosus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8604573&ind=77&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Illustration by Tamara Rees
Pericardial Effusion in Dogs and Cats
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Revised: August 01, 2024
Published: April 30, 2022
Pericardial effusion is a somewhat uncommon
condition, but when it is diagnosed it can be
serious for your pet. As more veterinary
practices adopt new technologies like
ultrasound, diagnosis of pericardial effusion has
become more common. If your pet has been
diagnosed with this condition, this article will
include some information to supplement what
your veterinarian has told you.
The Basics
The pericardial sac is formed by a thin
membrane (the pericardium) and normally
holds a very small amount of fluid. Pericardial
effusion refers to an abnormal buildup of fluid in
this sac. When extra fluid builds up, it’s like a
straightjacket around the heart. Imagine trying
to go about your daily life wearing a shirt that’s
four sizes too small. The heart is unable to fill
with blood and the extra pressure prevents it
from pumping life-giving blood and oxygen
around the body. When blood and oxygen can’t
be delivered, the body goes into shock. Death
is possible if the effusion can’t be removed
before too much time passes. “Too much time”
depends on many factors: how severe the lack
of oxygen is, how long it goes on, and other
issues.
In more chronic cases, the pressure buildup is
gradual, and this causes the heart to fail more
slowly. For these patients, fluid can back up
behind the heart into the abdomen, leading to a pot-bellied appearance (a condition
known as ascites) due to right-sided heart failure.
While there may normally be a teaspoon or two of thin, clear fluid in the pericardial sac, in
several abnormal conditions it can build up to life-threatening amounts. Sometimes this
can happen rapidly, and sometimes it can build up over a longer period. In either case,
you may only notice symptoms when they become severe, which may make it seem like a
sudden occurrence. Dogs and cats are experts in hiding illness, so something that may
seem sudden to you may have been brewing unnoticed for a long time.
What Causes the Fluid to Build Up?

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Pericardial Effusion in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=10920268&ind=78&objTypeID=1007 1/4
There are usually three types of fluid that can build up: blood, pus (a mix of dead white
blood cells and bacteria), and a clear fluid that is similar to the normal fluid found in the
pericardium, except in larger quantities.
We’ll start with blood as that is the most common fluid found in dogs (cats with pericardial
effusion are rare). In the vast majority of cases, the blood leaks from a small tumor
forming on the heart. Most of these are a type of aggressive malignancy (cancer) called
hemangiosarcoma. Due to the beating of the heart and the fact that hemangiosarcomas
are made of blood-forming tissue, they can bleed excessively, even if quite small. This
blood then builds up inside the sac around the heart and leads to shock and the heart not
being able to pump blood. Other types of tumors can cause bleeding in the pericardium,
but hemangiosarcoma is, unfortunately, the most common.
Certain types of rat poison can affect the body’s ability to clot blood and pericardial
effusion can result. This can usually be detected by a blood clotting test, which many
veterinary hospitals can do in-house. Any rat poison on the property should be reported to
your veterinarian to help with the diagnosis, even if you think your pet can’t get to it.
Blood can also leak from a tear in one of the chambers of the heart due to long-standing
heart disease. The chamber walls become thinned and can easily be ruptured by the
normal beating of the heart. This is relatively uncommon.
Pus can collect around the heart in rare cases, usually due to a migrating foreign body like
a porcupine quill, grass stem, or splinter. This is also an uncommon situation.
Fluid that is clear, not bloody, or only a little bloody may be caused by inflammation, an
autoimmune disease (like lupus), or, in the case of cats, Feline Infectious Peritonitis
(FIP) for which a new treatment recently became available (see link).
A condition known as an idiopathic pericardial effusion in which fluid builds up without a
definable cause may be present. In these cases, the fluid is clear and does not return in
about 50% of cases after removal.
If it is possible to sample the fluid (which can also temporarily relieve shock and buy some
time) your veterinarian can help guide you through what may be causing the buildup.
Samples may be sent to a pathologist for analysis and culture, and additional tests, such
as ultrasound or CT scan, are often used to identify the source of the fluid. In some cases,
the cause cannot be identified, and repeated tests may be needed.
What are the Clinical Signs?
How fast your pet has symptoms depends on many factors. Symptoms often seem to
come on suddenly, even if the fluid has built up over time. In some cases, the patient
becomes very weak very suddenly or even collapses. Many will have pale gums or have a
hard time breathing. This is a medical emergency and should be evaluated by a
veterinarian as soon as possible, day or night. Pericardial effusion should be a
consideration for any older pet with sudden weakness/collapse and an inability to get up.
German Shepherd Dogs, Golden Retrievers, and Labrador Retrievers seem to have
pericardial effusion more often than other breeds, although any dog can be subject to it.
In some cases, the onset can be less obvious and may just seem like a gradual “slowing
down.” Many owners will also mistake a slower onset of pericardial effusion as agerelated, or even weight gain as the abdomen slowly fills with fluid. Any older pet who can’t
keep up on the usual walks or seems to be eating less or lying around more should
prompt a veterinary evaluation.
How is Pericardial Effusion Treated?
If your pet has collapsed, the first steps in the hospital or ER will be to supply oxygen and
promote circulation. Usually, IV fluids are administered rapidly, and blood samples are
drawn. Do not be shocked if your pet is taken “to the back” for treatment. Time is vital if

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Pericardial Effusion in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=10920268&ind=78&objTypeID=1007 2/4
the patient is in shock.
In some cases, a quick, bedside ultrasound (echocardiography) can confirm the presence
of pericardial fluid. Even if ultrasound is not available, valuable clues can be found in the
history, on physical examination, on radiographs (X-rays), or other tests that can clue your
veterinarian in that there may be fluid around the heart.
Rapid decompression of the pressure around the heart (often with ultrasound guidance)
can be quickly performed with a long needle, which improves circulation and oxygen
delivery, often quite fast. For some of these patients, improvement is often dramatic and
can seem miraculous, even if the improvement doesn't last very long. Drawing off the fluid
(called pericardiocentesis) can also provide samples for lab analysis and culture. Many
patients do not need any sedation for pericardiocentesis, or only a local anesthetic at the
site of needle entry.
In most cases, once the fluid is removed and the pressure on the heart is relieved, they
feel much better. IV fluids and other medications may need to be given, and oxygen will
be given to patients with trouble breathing. Patients are usually watched for several hours
to ensure that the fluid does not return and there are no complications. EKG monitoring is
often needed, as cardiac rhythm disturbances can sometimes happen. For more stable
patients where cancer is highly suspected (and there is no pain or trouble breathing),
discharge for hospice care at home can be considered. This is usually a painless disease
in most cases. Death, if it occurs, can be delayed for hours or even days.
Hospitalization for accompanying disorders may be needed. For some patients, a
procedure known as a pericardiectomy, where the sac is surgically removed, can be
considered, but this is uncommon and must be performed by an experienced surgeon.
What is the Prognosis?
Unfortunately, the prognosis is not good for many dogs with pericardial effusion. There are
exceptions, however. For those in which a bloody fluid is found after pericardiocentesis,
hemangiosarcoma is often the working diagnosis. Hemangiosarcoma is a very aggressive
type of cancer, and survival is often measured in weeks to months after diagnosis. (Other
types of tumors can have different survival times, so consultation with a veterinary
oncologist should be a strong consideration.)
An ultrasound of the heart is often part of the workup, even if it was initially used to
diagnose and relieve the pericardial effusion. Echocardiography with a cardiologist,
internist, or radiologist should be considered, if possible, to ensure the highest chance of
finding the cause. Even if a mass is not found on ultrasound initially, it can sometimes be
found after a few weeks have passed.
Sending the fluid to a lab is also often done and is a necessity if pus or clear/blood-tinged
fluid is recovered on pericardiocentesis. Fluid that appears to be straight blood may not
yield results, but it is sent to the lab in many cases.
For those uncommon cases where clear or blood-tinged fluid is recovered, the prognosis
improves a bit (except in cats, where this might indicate Feline Infectious Peritonitis and a
promising new treatment may be effective).
Clear fluid may indicate pericardial effusion for which the cause is unknown and may clear
on its own, or with medication. In these cases, merely removing the fluid can be curative
in about half of the cases.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10920268&pid=19239
a7e519ee-5190-4a6e-9c84-655af8ff8aae.1754155753

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Pericardial Effusion in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=10920268&ind=78&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Pericardial Effusion in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=10920268&ind=78&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Cairn Terrier
Photo courtesy of Deposit Photos
Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Published: June 22, 2018
Veins are part of the body’s circulatory system. The hepatic portal system consists of the
numerous veins that drain blood away from digestive organs and deliver it to the liver.
Small veins merge into one large one, called the portal vein, that feeds directly into the
liver. The formation of these veins, however, can sometimes go awry.
Portal vein hypoplasia (PVH), also known
as portal venous hypoplasia, hepatic
microvascular dysplasia, portal
microvascular dysplasia, non-cirrhotic
portal hypertension, and hepatoportal
fibrosis, is a circulatory anomaly of the liver
in dogs and cats. Hypoplasia indicates the
incomplete development of a structure.
With PVH, there is a microscopic
malformation of the liver’s tiny blood
vessels. The tiny abnormalities can lead to
defective connections between circulation
in the portal vein and that of the rest of the
body.
PVH can occur alone, or it can be
combined with portosystemic shunts (PSS).
A shunt allows blood to flow between two
structures that are not supposed to be
connected. One study showed that 58
percent of dogs and 87 percent of cats with
PVH had a concurrent PSS that they were
born with. Cats are less commonly affected
than dogs.
PVH is a nonprogressive disorder,
meaning it does not get worse over time.
Pets with PVH should not be bred due to the possibility this is an inherited condition. This
condition most commonly affects Yorkshire terriers and Cairn terriers, but it’s also seen in
Maltese, dachshunds, miniature poodles, Shih tzus, Lhasa apsos, cocker spaniels, and
West Highland white terriers. Dogs with PVH are usually older at time of diagnosis,
compared to dogs with PSS. No gender predisposition has been noted.
Clinical Signs
Many pets that have PVH without portal hypertension don’t have any signs or have signs
that are less severe than those with PSSs. Possible clinical signs include failure to grow,
weight loss, small stature, lack of appetite, and behavioral changes.

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8567801&ind=79&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Dogs rarely exhibit signs of hepatic encephalopathy (HE), but it is possible. Possible
clinical signs of HE include circling, behavior changes, head pressing, ataxia, weakness,
seizures, coma, stupor, pacing, blindness, and vocalization. HE is a consequence of liver
failure.
Other clinical signs that can be seen in PVH dogs include excessive thirst and urination,
vomiting, diarrhea, pica (eating abnormal and often undigestible items), bloody vomiting,
bloody stools, blood in urine, straining to urinate, and drooling.
Diagnosis
To diagnose your pet, your veterinarian will take a thorough history, give a physical exam,
take a complete blood count, run a blood serum chemistry, do a urinalysis, run blood bile
acids, radiograph/ultrasound the abdomen, and may take liver biopsies for analysis. The
liver biopsy can provide the definitive diagnosis if it shows the abnormal vessels.
Treatment
Therapy for PVH is aimed at controlling clinical signs. Therapy does not result in a cure,
and no surgical correction is possible.
1. Dogs that are affected with PVH, but don’t have any signs, do not necessarily
require any therapy.
2. If there are signs of HE, treatment is directed at controlling those clinical signs.
3. Hepato-protective supplements can be given, but it is not known if they improve
the lifespan of affected dogs. Supplements include s-adenosylmethionine
(SAMe), vitamin E, milk thistle, and ursodeoxycholic acid.
4. Patients that have concurrent PSSs may require surgical correction of the
macroscopic shunt.
5. Dogs may be placed on a low-protein commercial diet with high-quality protein,
to reduce the protein levels in their system.
Monitoring And Prognosis
Patients with PVH are monitored with yearly biochemistry panels and bile acid tests to
assess any abnormalities or changes in liver values. Monitoring is important even in dogs
that do not have clinical signs, so that any elevated values can be acted on.
Overall, prognosis for patients with PVH is good, especially if the dog doesn’t have any
signs. Most affected dogs have a normal life expectancy. Rarely, some pets have PVH so
severe that they develop liver failure; their prognosis is poor.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8567801&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155777
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8567801&ind=79&objTypeID=1007 2/3

8/2/25, 10:59 PM Portal Vein Hypoplasia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8567801&ind=79&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats
Robert Proš ek, DVM, MS, DACVIM, ECVIM-CA
Revised: October 02, 2024
Published: September 19, 2011
What is Pulmonary Hypertension?
Pulmonary (lung) hypertension (PHT) is high
blood pressure in the arteries and pulmonary
veins leading in and out of your pet's lungs.
If the high blood pressure becomes too
severe, it can cause disease and failure of
the right side of the heart.
Generally speaking, pulmonary hypertension
results from other diseases the pet already
has, so it's referred to as a secondary
disease rather than a primary one.
Diseases that can cause pulmonary
hypertension include heartworm disease and pulmonary thromboembolism, both of which
block the arteries in the lung; diseases of the lungs, such as pulmonary fibrosis or chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease; or diseases affecting the left side of the heart, such as
degenerative mitral valve disease or dilated cardiomyopathy. However, in some instances,
it can be the primary, or only, disease. If a disease has no known cause, it’s called
idiopathic, and primary pulmonary hypertension has no known cause.
Pulmonary hypertension is seen far more commonly in dogs than in cats.
Signs
Clinical signs associated with pulmonary hypertension depend on the severity of the
hypertension and the underlying primary disease process. Dogs with pulmonary
hypertension can have no clinical signs (if the hypertension is mild or moderate), and even
dogs with severe pulmonary hypertension can appear relatively normal at rest. However,
clinical signs often appear when the dog exercises or exerts itself.
Such signs include exertional dyspnea (shortness of breath), syncope (fainting), or ataxia
(staggering and wobbliness) when exercising. With severe pulmonary hypertension, dogs
can be short of breath even at rest and have enough trouble breathing that their gums can
become bluish from lack of oxygen. Some develop heart murmurs (which your
veterinarian should be able to detect with a stethoscope), and some develop a fluid-filled
and distended abdomen (right-sided congestive heart failure). Dogs with severe
pulmonary hypertension can die suddenly.
Dogs with pulmonary hypertension will also often show signs associated with the
underlying primary disease process. For example, dogs with severe lung disease might
cough (note: pulmonary hypertension does not cause coughing, but diseases that also

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=5138473&ind=80&objTypeID=1007 1/4
cause coughing can cause pulmonary hypertension). Your veterinarian might hear
crackles and wheezes when they listen to the chest with a stethoscope. Dogs with leftsided heart disease might have a heart murmur.
Diagnosis
The diagnostic test of choice is cardiac ultrasound (Doppler echocardiography). This
provides a noninvasive and readily available method of diagnosis and is generally
performed by a veterinary cardiologist. It does not require the pet to be anesthetized or
sedated.
Pulmonary hypertension is unrelated to systemic hypertension (the type of hypertension
that your doctor measures with a blood pressure cuff or an “at-home” blood pressure
monitor). Therefore, pulmonary hypertension can't be diagnosed by measuring blood
pressure.
PHT Classification
Veterinarians classify pulmonary hypertension based on the underlying cause. There are
six broad “types” of pulmonary hypertension. Below, you will see the medical term
followed by explanations in parentheses.
Group 1: Pulmonary Arterial hypertension
a. Primary (idiopathic, essential) pulmonary hypertension
b. Heritable (It can be passed down from parent to offspring.)
c. Associated with left-to-right shunting congenital cardiac disease (e.g. Patent
Ductus arteriosus, Ventricular Septal Defect, Atrial Septal Defect). These are
heart defects commonly referred to as “holes in the heart”.
Group 2: Left-sided heart disease
a. Left ventricular dysfunction, Dilated Cardiomyopathy (The left ventricle, or main
pumping heart chamber, is failing to contract properly)
b. Mitral valve disease, Mitral regurgitation (The mitral valve, or valve that lies
between the left heart chambers, leaks)
c. Mitral stenosis or left atrial obstruction (The valve between left heart chambers
fails to open properly.)
Group 3: Respiratory disease/hypoxia
a. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD - Decreased airflow, irritation,
and swelling.)
b. Severe tracheal or mainstem bronchial collapse (The main tube to the lungs
becomes narrow/closed.)
c. Pneumonia, severe (An infection in the lung’s air sacs)
d. Sleep apnea, severe (Periods of absent breathing during sleep)
e. Chronic exposure to high altitudes
f. Bronchiectasis, emphysema (Bronchial tubes are dilated, air sac walls are
damaged.)
g. Pulmonary fibrosis (Lung scarring makes it hard for lungs to expand.)
h. Pulmonary idiopathic eosinophilia (An immune reaction occurs where large
numbers of white blood cells called eosinophils infiltrate the lungs.)
Group 4: Embolism (blood vessel blockage) or Thromboembolism (blood clot)
Pulmonary embolism is rare in dogs. Causes of embolism include fat (associated with
long-bone fractures), or implanted cardiac devices (e.g. coils used to occlude a Patent
Ductus Arteriosus). Blood clots that form elsewhere in the body can occasionally float up

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=5138473&ind=80&objTypeID=1007 2/4
to the heart and into the pulmonary arteries, where they may partially or completely block
a pulmonary artery. At other times, a clot can form directly within the pulmonary artery.
The effect is the same – the blockage of the vessels.
Group 5: Parasitic diseases
Heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) and the lungworm (Angiostrongylus vasorum) are parasitic
worms that live within pulmonary arteries. They cause damage to the walls of the arteries,
causing them to thicken and become less elastic, increasing blood pressure by causing
inflammation. They also physically block the vessels. Finally, they can cause blood clots to
form within the pulmonary arteries.
Group 6: Multifactorial disorders or unclear mechanisms
a. Cases where a dog has multiple causes that span multiple groups (e.g. mitral
valve disease (Group 2) and heartworm disease (Group 5).
b. Tumors that physically compress a pulmonary artery or obstruct blood flow from
inside the artery
How is PHT Treated?
Pulmonary hypertension can be difficult and frustrating to treat. Your veterinarian will
attempt to identify its cause and treat the underlying disease. Medications can be used to
improve the patient’s quality of life.
Sudden Onset
When pulmonary hypertension appears suddenly and severely (those cases are called
acute), treatment focuses on giving oxygen because most patients improve with oxygen;
significant exercise restriction; and alleviating congestive heart failure and any underlying
diseases. At-home oxygen cages can be used to help provide relief for dogs with severe
pulmonary hypertension.
Longer-Term Management
Longer-term management generally relies on the medication sildenafil citrate (Viagra® –
yes, the Viagra® you’ve heard about, but it also works well to relieve signs of pulmonary
hypertension as it was originally developed to treat pulmonary hypertension in humans) or
tadalafil (Cialis®). Additionally, your veterinarian might prescribe pimobendan, a heart
medication. Newer human drugs that decrease pulmonary pressure (e.g., iloprost and
bosentan) may be cost-prohibitive for most clients.
Treating whatever disease is causing secondary pulmonary hypertension -
heart failure, heartworm disease, pulmonary thromboembolism, acute
respiratory distress syndrome - will often help reduce pulmonary
hypertension.
Mild and moderate pulmonary hypertension generally does not require treatment. Rarely,
moderate pulmonary hypertension can cause clinical signs that require retreatment.
Prognosis
The prognosis for a dog with pulmonary hypertension depends on the underlying disease
and how advanced it is. One study shows that in dogs who survive the first week of
therapy, the probability of survival at six months was 84% and 73% at one year.
Pulmonary hypertension is a truly debilitating disease, but on occasion, it is cured or at
least managed well with drugs: patients’ clinical signs improve when they take sildenafil
citrate. However, many patients die suddenly because of pulmonary hypertension or have

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=5138473&ind=80&objTypeID=1007 3/4
a quality of life that the owners consider intolerable.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5138473&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155802
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Pulmonary Hypertension in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=5138473&ind=80&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Photo by Sharon Shriver
Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats
with Heart Disease
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: October 23, 2023
Published: May 22, 2015
Many heart diseases, when severe
enough, result in congestive heart failure
(CHF). When the left side of the heart is
diseased, this presents as a build-up of
fluid in the lungs, causing breathing
difficulties and shortness of breath, which
can be severe. However, before such signs
occur, many animals start to have an
increase in their breathing rate. This can
be subtle and is best detected when your
pet is sleeping (because not many things
affect your pet’s breathing rate when
they’re asleep).
Your veterinarian can use your
observational skills and record of your pet’s
breathing to help manage your pet's heart
disease in three ways:
1. Preclinical Heart Disease
Heart disease in dogs and cats that will
eventually become CHF progresses over
time from mild to more severe disease.
When it gets severe enough, fluid builds up
in the lungs (CHF), requiring treatments to
relieve this congestion. However, before it
reaches this stage, your veterinarian might
have you start measuring the sleeping
respiratory rate (SRR) so that you catch
CHF at the earliest stage possible. Usually, such measurements start when the disease is
moderate-to-severe but does not yet show signs of CHF. Your veterinarian will use tests
such as chest X-rays (radiographs) or cardiac ultrasound (echocardiography) to determine
when measuring the SRR is appropriate.
2. Diagnosis of Congestive Heart Failure
Sometimes, signs of CHF are subtle and easily confused with other non-cardiac diseases.
In such cases, your veterinarian might get you to measure your pet’s SRR to help rule out
a diagnosis of CHF. If the rate is normal, CHF is extremely unlikely, and your veterinarian
can focus on other causes of your pet’s clinical signs.
3. Management of Congestive Heart Failure (Pulmonary Edema)

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8401142&ind=81&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Willow, 13-year-old female
chihuahua with CHF sleeping on her
camping chair. Photo by Janet
Stomberg
If your veterinarian diagnoses your pet with CHF and
begins treatment for it (with diuretics and other
medications), they will probably have you monitor the
response to the medications by measuring your pet’s SRR
at home. Studies have found that measuring the SRR is a
very sensitive way to tell if your pet’s heart failure is wellcontrolled. When medications are working well, your pet
should feel good, but more importantly, the SRR should be
between 10-25 breaths per minute (in most cases, it will be
less than 30 breaths per minute). If the SRR increases or
exceeds 30 breaths per minute, this may indicate fluid
building up in the lungs. Your veterinarian will generally
recommend you return to the clinic to confirm this is the
case, or they might instruct you to increase the dose of
diuretics.
How to Measure SRR
SRR and resting respiratory rate (RRR) should be obtained
when your pet is comfortable, in a comfortable
environment (not too hot or cold), and not after physical
activity. If sleeping, your pet should be in a “deep sleep”, not a twitching or “dreaming”
state.
If possible, the respiratory rate should be counted for a full minute, although 30 seconds is
often sufficient. One breath has two components: breathing in (inspiration or inhalation)
and breathing out (expiration or exhalation).
These videos show two dogs and a cat either sleeping or resting quietly. The counter
records each breath for over a full minute. Watch these to understand how this is done.
Canine Sleeping Respiratory Rate
Feline Sleeping Respiratory Rate
0:00 / 1:05

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8401142&ind=81&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Canine Resting Respiratory Rate
There’s An App For That!
Various monitoring apps allow you to measure your pet's respiratory rate by tapping the
screen of your smartphone or tablet in time with their breathing. Once you have the
results, you can email them to your veterinarian and discuss the next steps for your pet's
care. Talk to your veterinarian for more information.
"Health Collars" to Monitor Sleeping Respiratory Rates in Dogs
In the last several years, electronic collars that record various biometric data have
become popular. These collars claim to measure heart rate, body temperature, exercise,
and respiratory rate. No studies exist examining the use of these collars in diagnosing
heart disease and congestive heart failure in dogs.
Most of these collars do not measure respiratory rate directly but use the variations in
heart rate that occur with breathing in dogs when they are resting or sleeping. Normal
dogs vary their heart rates with each breath, allowing these variations to be measured to
estimate the respiratory rate. However, when a dog develops CHF, this normal variation in
heart rate disappears. Once treated successfully with medication, this variation can return.
0:00 / 1:05
0:00 / 1:05

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8401142&ind=81&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Therefore, the device could, in theory, be used to measure sleeping or resting respiratory
rates. However, instead of looking for an increase in the sleeping or resting respiratory
rate, impending CHF might be suspected if the device failed to measure the respiratory
rate (because the heart rate variation had disappeared). It would not give you a higher
respiratory rate measurement (above your dog’s normal resting or sleeping rate), but
would give you a measurement error.
In such cases, consult your veterinarian to confirm that the heart disease has destabilized
enough to stop the collar from working properly.
Always talk to your veterinarian if you are unsure about how to measure your pet's resting
respiratory rate or if you notice changes in your pet's breathing, including a rate increase,
more respiratory effort, coughing, or other concerns.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8401142&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155826
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Sleeping and Resting Respiratory Rates of Dogs and Cats with Heart Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=8401142&ind=81&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Diagram of the normal heart. The left ventricle is shown in pink.
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Subaortic Stenosis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 17, 2023
Published: July 03, 2006
Unless you are familiar with the
anatomy of the heart, its outflow
tracts, and the aorta itself, some
basic explanation helps to understand
subaortic stenosis and why it is bad.
Subaortic stenosis (also simply called
SAS) is a scar-like narrowing, which
is called a stenosis, located under the
aortic valve. Let's back up a bit and
cover how things are supposed to
work in the heart.
Let's Start with the Normal Situation
The heart sits more or less centrally
in the chest and is divided into a left
side, which receives oxygen-rich
blood from the lung and pumps it to
the rest of the body, and a right side,
which receives “used“ blood from the
body and pumps it to the lung to pick
up fresh oxygen. Because the left side of the heart must supply blood to the whole body,
its muscle is especially thick and strong. Blood is pumped from the left ventricle (the
pumping chamber) to a particularly large blood vessel called the aorta, the body’s largest
artery. The valve that separates the left ventricle from the aorta is called the aortic valve.
The left ventricle narrows as it leads to the aorta, and this area is called the left ventricular
outflow tract.
In subaortic stenosis, the left ventricular outflow tract just below the aortic valve has a
scar-like narrowing called a stenosis. This means that the left ventricle must pump extra
hard to get the correct blood volume through the narrowed area. The high-pressure blood
squirts through in a turbulent fashion, which creates a sound known as a heart murmur.
Any cause of turbulent blood flow can be heard as a murmur; a murmur does not always
indicate disease, but a murmur is usually the first sign that the puppy in question might
have SAS.
The most commonly affected breeds for SAS include the Golden Retriever, Rottweiler,
Newfoundland, Great Dane, Boxer, German Shepherd, German Short-haired pointer, and
Dogue de Bordeaux.
When a puppy with SAS is born, the stenosis is very small, barely a ridge near the valve,
but over the first six months of life, the stenosis grows, and the murmur (hopefully)
becomes more apparent.

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Subaortic Stenosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952497&ind=82&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Chest radiograph of a puppy with SAS. The bulge of the
aortic valve is conspicuous. (Photo used with permission by
ASEC Cardiology)
The murmur is best heard on the left side of the chest at the level of the base of the heart,
right over the aortic valve. The louder the murmur, the worse the obstruction of the valve.
The murmur is famous for radiating its sound up the carotid arteries of the neck, making a
murmur that can be heard with a stethoscope unusually far forward.
Over time, the muscle of the left ventricle thickens and grows due to the excess work it
must perform. Eventually, this interferes with the pumping chamber’s flexibility and ability
to fill. Abnormal muscle in the heart makes for abnormal electrical conduction in the heart
and soon the heart’s normal electrical rhythm is disrupted. Since pumping and filling are
highly coordinated electrically, when this coordination is lost, fainting spells or even
sudden death during exercise can result. Most dogs with SAS do not survive beyond age
3 years without treatment, though dogs with milder cases can have normal life spans. A
dog with SAS is always predisposed to electrical arrhythmia, heart failure, and infection of
the abnormal aortic valve.
The disease is mildest when the puppy is really young and gets worse over the
first 6 to 12 months of life.
Recognizing the Disease
Obviously, the pup is not going to receive proper management unless the condition is
recognized. The first step is hearing the murmur.
As mentioned, the murmur is the sound made by turbulent blood flow. In other words, a
murmur is a sound that might or might not indicate heart disease. Puppies under the age
of six months sometimes demonstrate what are called innocent murmurs, which are
simply temporary turbulent blood flow. Innocent murmurs should disappear by age six
months so that any murmur that persists beyond this time should be pursued as
potentially abnormal. This does not mean that you should wait until the puppy is six
months of age to attempt diagnosis. The sooner a diagnosis is made, the sooner
treatment can begin, and a valid prognosis can be given. There are some size limitations
with regard to the equipment needed to assess the puppy, however. Your veterinarian will
guide you as to when it is best to pursue the next step in diagnostics.
After the Murmur
Radiographs are helpful in assessing any
evidence of heart failure and may even
show a dilation of the aorta near the valve
(caused by the high-pressure squirt of
blood through the narrowing). This said,
the real key to diagnosis is ultrasound, or
echocardiography, where chamber sizes
and heart wall thickness are measured.
Generally, the cross-sectional area of the
left ventricle outflow tract is compared to
that of the aorta in a ratio to assess the
severity of the stenosis. This information
is generally adequate to confirm the
diagnosis, though a mild case might have
values that overlap the normal range.
Such a patient might have to be followed
over time.
One of the most important aspects of the
echocardiography evaluation is the
Doppler study. This involves measuring the pressure difference across the stenosis, which
essentially tells us how hard the heart is working to eject blood through the narrowing.

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Subaortic Stenosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952497&ind=82&objTypeID=1007 2/4
This information is correlated with survival time and the need for treatment. A pressure
difference of 40 mm of Hg (pressure is measured in millimeters of mercury, abbreviated
mm of Hg) is mild whereas a pressure difference of 80 mm of Hg is severe. Mildly affected
dogs may not require treatment at all.
Treatment: Drugs
The goal of treating SAS is to create normal exercise tolerance and a normal life span.
The most popular class of drug for SAS are the beta blockers. Beta receptors are the
neurologic areas on the heart that respond to adrenaline (we call it epinephrine now) and
cause the heart rate to speed up during exercise. In SAS, this kind of racing pulse is what
leads to the abnormal electrical rhythm and, ultimately, to fainting. The beta blockers keep
the heart from racing. In one study, dogs with SAS treated with a beta blocker called
atenolol had a median survival of 56 months vs. 19 months for dogs receiving no
treatment.
Treatment: Exercise Restriction
Fatal heart rhythm episodes in SAS patients are associated with excitement and
demanding exercise (though sudden death can certainly occur without either situation). It
is probably best to avoid strenuous exercise if possible.
Treatment: Surgery
Open heart surgery is uncommonly performed in dogs, but it is possible to surgically
excise the collar of scarring that is narrowing the outflow tract. You would think this would
solve the whole problem, but in fact, resulting survival times are similar to those for dogs
simply taking atenolol.
Treatment: Balloon Valvuloplasty
With balloon valvuloplasty, the patient is anesthetized, and a catheter is threaded into the
heart so that it spans the stenosis. The catheter has a tough balloon at the end, which is
then inflated, breaking down the scarring and dilating the stenosis. Again, you would think
that this would solve the problem, but survival times are similar to those for dogs simply
taking atenolol.
At this time, invasive procedures cannot be recommended over medication. More
complete studies in the future may change.
Subaortic stenosis is a genetic disease. Because inheritance is not simple, dogs
with mild disease may produce puppies with severe disease. No dog with
subaortic stenosis of any degree should be bred.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952497&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155852
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Subaortic Stenosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952497&ind=82&objTypeID=1007 3/4

8/2/25, 11:00 PM Subaortic Stenosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952497&ind=82&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Nystagmus. Graphic Courtesy
of MarVistaVet
Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and
Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 27, 2023
Published: July 17, 2006
Most of us have some idea of what happens when someone has a stroke: they are going
along normally, and then suddenly, a group of nerves does not work. This might involve an
inability to move certain muscles (arm, face, etc.), or it could involve deeper, more crucial
neurologic functions in such a way that the affected person dies. (In fact, stroke is the third
most common cause of human death after cancer and heart disease.) Most of us know
that a stroke involves some kind of blood clot plugging a blood vessel in the brain,
preventing an important area from receiving circulation. Most of us also know that
sometimes the symptoms of a stroke are reversible or partly reversible, but we don’t know
what separates the reversible stroke symptoms from the irreversible ones.
In this discussion, we are going to be reviewing strokes and other vascular accidents in
the brains of pets.
But First a Note on Vestibular Disease
If you have come here seeking information regarding a dog or
cat that has a head tilt to one side, perhaps falling toward that
same side, and rapid back-and-forth darting of the eyes, you
are in the wrong classroom. The subject you want to read
about is vestibular disease, which is generally not caused by a
vascular accident but is often incorrectly referred to as a stroke.
A vascular accident could produce a vestibular syndrome, but
chances are greater that a vestibular patient has another
underlying condition. If your pet has vestibular disease, you
should probably read the article section on that instead.
Is a Vascular Accident the Same as a Stroke?
The short answer is that stroke and vascular accident are the same thing, but there is
actually more to a vascular accident than a blood clot lodging or forming in an
inappropriate place. Other vascular accidents include a small area of bleeding in the brain,
a small blood vessel tumor interfering with circulation, a temporary blood vessel spasm, or
even an area of inflammation that alters blood flow. The bottom line is an area of the brain
gets deprived of circulation (and thus of oxygen), the neurons (cells that make up the
nervous system’s electrical wiring system) are injured or killed, and function is lost. What
the function loss might look like is completely dependent on the area of the brain involved.
Here is a list of some of the possible clinical signs, with an illustration of the four brain
regions below.
Brain Region and Clinical Signs
Telencephalon
Change in mental alertness

8/2/25, 11:01 PM Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952504&ind=83&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Vascular accident is non-progressive after the first 72 hours.
Graphic Courtesy of MarVistaVet
Loss of certain eye reflexes
on the side opposite the
brain damage
Loss of sensation of the nose
on the side opposite the
brain damage
Weakness on the side
opposite the brain damage
Circling towards the side of
the brain damage
Drunken gait
Head pressing
Seizures
Thalamus or Midbrain
Crossed eyes
Head tilt or turn towards the side of the brain damage
Postural defects
Loss of certain eye reflexes on the side opposite the brain damage
Back and forth eye movements
Cerebellum
Drunken gait
Loss of certain eye reflexes on the side of the brain damage
Head twisted backward or upward
Measuring steps incorrectly
Tremors during intended actions
Back and forth eye movements
Head tilt
Rigid neck and body
Brain Stem: Midbrain, Pons, or Medulla
Head and neck pain
Problems with the reflexes of the head and face
Altered states of consciousness
Weakness in all four legs
Postural defects
Head tilt and back-and-forth eye movements
Vascular accident is non-progressive after the first 72 hours.
Factors Increasing Risk
As far as human patients go, most of us are familiar with the risk factors as they are
emphasized in public service announcements: smoking, diabetes mellitus, high blood
cholesterol levels, alcohol use, and history of heart attack. Most of these problems are
simply not relevant to pets, which makes vascular accident a much less common
condition in pets than it is in humans. That said, an underlying disease can be found in
approximately 50 percent of dogs with vascular accidents and 30 percent of dogs with
vascular accidents will have high blood pressure. In dogs, the most common factors
increasing the risk of vascular accident are:
Cushing's disease

8/2/25, 11:01 PM Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952504&ind=83&objTypeID=1007 2/4
A more formal look at a canine brain. Graphic by VIN.
Chronic kidney failure
Other risks include heartworm disease,
particularly if a larval heartworm gets
lost during migration and ends up in the
brain (an example of aberrant
migration). Also, the use of
phenylpropanolamine, a medication
removed from the human market
because of increased stroke risks, is still
common in dogs as treatment for
urinary incontinence. This medication
has been implicated, albeit rarely, in
cases of canine vascular accidents.
Additional causes include
atherosclerosis (cholesterol plaques as
humans get) associated with
hypothyroidism, hypertriglyceridemia
(elevated blood fat levels) in miniature
schnauzers, and cancer.
In cats, common underlying diseases
would be:
Hyperthyroidism
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
Chronic kidney failure
Diabetes mellitus, cancer, migrating heartworm larvae, and migrating Cuterebra (a type of
fly) larvae probably deserve at least an honorable mention as well.
How to Tell if There Has Been a Vascular Accident
The pet with sudden neurologic symptoms could very well be a victim of vascular accident
but may also have suffered some other condition such as head trauma, metabolic
disease, poisoning, cancer, or even infection or inflammation. Vascular accidents are
characterized by sudden onset that may progress over 24-72 hours, followed by slow or
partial recovery. (Of course, death is possible if the initial injury is severe enough.)
Accidents involving bleeds tend to be more severe than those involving obstructive clots
as they involve larger areas of the brain. Fortunately for dogs (and unlike the situation in
humans), bleeding accidents (hemorrhagic stroke as from an aneurysm) are far less
common than clotting accidents (embolism or thrombosis).
The first step is going to be basic metabolic blood and urine testing, plus a measurement
of blood pressure. Other tests may be indicated depending on the patient’s specific history
and the initial test findings. Ultimately, MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is needed to
detect hemorrhage, blood clots, or simply damaged areas of the brain. Radiography is not
adequate as imaging of the brain tissue through the skull bones is not really possible with
this technique. CT (formerly called CAT scanning) is not as sensitive in its ability to pick up
blood clots and damaged brain areas but is a fair second choice if MRI is not available.
Thromboelastography (TEG) testing is another blood test that can also be used to help
distinguish a vascular accident from some other type of neurologic condition.
Treatment
Treatment of vascular accidents is all about supportive care: maximizing brain
oxygenation until the damaged nerves can heal. If seizures are occurring, they must be
suppressed with medication. If the pressure inside the skull is elevated, it must be
normalized. High blood pressure must be corrected, as must abnormal bleeding states.

8/2/25, 11:01 PM Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952504&ind=83&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Patients can be affected such that they need special home care, such as help with
mobility and toilet function. Physical therapy may be helpful in regaining function. Some
patients, however, are so compromised that they need intensive nursing in the hospital, at
least temporarily. This could include a feeding tube, supplemental oxygen or even a
ventilator to assist breathing, depending on how much loss of function has occurred.
Treatment of the vascular accident patient is basically supportive; there is no specific
treatment as yet supported by scientific evidence and investigation. There are, however,
many treatments that might be employed based on theory. Calcium channel blockers,
amlodipine in particular, appear to be protective of neurologic tissues if administered in the
first six hours after the event. Antioxidants such as SAMe make logical sense, but
controlled studies in animals have not been performed. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy has
been advocated to improve oxygenation of compromised brain tissue so as to minimize
the area of permanent damage.
Recovery
In humans, the degree and speed of recovery depend on the size of the brain area
involved, the location of the brain area involved, the cause of the vascular accident, and
the progression of the clinical signs after the initial event. In a study of 33 dogs with
vascular accidents, none of these things correlated with outcome. Instead, dogs that had
known underlying diseases (i.e., where the cause of the vascular accident was known)
had shorter survival times and increased risk of recurrence. As a rule, pets are felt to have
a higher potential for recovery than humans (with recovery times typically measured in
days to weeks).
Ask your veterinarian about a possible referral to a neurologist or a physical therapist.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952504&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155884
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:01 PM Vascular Accidents (Strokes) in the Brains of Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=4952504&ind=83&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Echocardiogram of dog's mitral valve
Photo courtesy of Dr. Mark Kittleson
What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Revised: July 29, 2022
Published: January 09, 2020
What is an echocardiogram?
An echocardiogram, also known as
an echo or cardiac ultrasound, is a
diagnostic tool that looks closely at
the heart as well as inside and
around it. An echo uses highfrequency sound waves to create live
images, allowing veterinarians to get
an idea of what the heart looks like
and how it is functioning in real time.
This provides information about the
size, shape, and function of the heart,
its four chambers, the heart valves,
and surrounding structures, such as
the pericardial sac.
Doppler (both Color Doppler and
Spectral Doppler), is another non-invasive ultrasound test used to assess how blood is
flowing through the heart, as well as how blood enters and exits it.
Can my regular veterinarian do an echocardiogram?
An echo is a little bit different from a general ultrasound because it requires a great deal of
knowledge and training to perform, is more technically difficult, and sometimes requires
specialized equipment such as cardiac transducers (ultrasound probes). This form of
imaging is tightly focused on the heart. Other organs, such as those in the belly, are rarely
examined during an echocardiogram.
In addition to assessing for obvious abnormalities (e.g. masses in and around the heart,
fluid in the pericardial sac), measurements of individual heart wall thickness, chamber
size, and blood flow are taken. Calculations are done to see how well the heart is
functioning based on these measurements. As such, many general practice veterinarians
will refer pets to veterinary cardiologists or other imaging specialists for echocardiograms
rather than perform the procedure themselves.
What is the procedure?
Echocardiograms are typically done with the pet lying on an ultrasound-specific table. The
ultrasound transducer (probe) is held against the skin overlying the heart. The transducer
sends sound waves to the heart, which are reflected back to the transducer and translated
to images on a screen. Hair does not conduct sound waves very well, so the pet’s skin is
usually moistened with alcohol prior to the procedure. Ultrasound gel is then applied to the

8/2/25, 11:01 PM What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=9453775&ind=84&objTypeID=1007 1/2
skin to provide better conduction. Ribs do not conduct sound waves well either, so the
transducer is often placed in many strategic areas on the skin between the ribs to get an
accurate view of the entire heart.
Echocardiograms are typically painless and often done in a quiet, dark room. Most pets
are able to lie comfortably without stress and with minimal restraint. Rarely do pets need
sedation. Almost all pets can safely undergo echo, but your veterinarian will be the best
judge.
Why would my pet need this procedure?
If your pet was recently diagnosed with a heart murmur or is suspected to have heart
disease, your veterinarian may recommend an echocardiogram. This recommendation will
be based on factors such as concerns seen on X-rays and associated clinical signs like
coughing, shortness of breath, or fainting.
A heart murmur in a young, healthy animal usually warrants an echocardiogram at some
point to determine what congenital disease (if any) is causing the murmur, and how
severe the disease is. This is important because certain congenital diseases, which the
animal is born with, can be repaired or improved with various interventions.
Physiological or innocent murmurs are harmless murmurs that are created from blood flow
patterns through the heart chambers. They can sometimes be heard unexpectedly,
especially in young puppies and kittens, and are not a cause for concern. However,
physiologic murmurs are not easy to differentiate from heart murmurs associated with
heart disease or dysfunction. Without any clinical signs, your veterinarian may
recommend monitoring the murmur until the next vaccine series or checkup. If your
veterinarian continues to hear a murmur by eight weeks of age, even if your dog or cat is
showing no signs of heart disease, an echo will likely be necessary. Some veterinarians
may recommend waiting until your pet is a bit older, up to 16 weeks of age, to allow for an
adequate echocardiogram without requiring a lot of handling and stress to the pet, but
usually only if your pet remains otherwise healthy and without any signs of heart disease.
The echo can show if the heart is working properly, and if not, what the problem is.
Medications and treatments for heart disease are tailored to the individual, so
understanding the problem correctly helps provide the best treatment. Echocardiograms
can also be used to see if treatments are helping or if a change in dosage or new
medications are required.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9453775&pid=19239
e8269d97-d24e-4fd1-8c5d-a738c8a792e8.1754155907
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:01 PM What to Expect From Your Pet’s Echocardiogram - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254088&id=9453775&ind=84&objTypeID=1007 2/2
