A representative number of herd samples should be collected from a minimum of 10 animals to account for the typical high individual variation in the number of eggs shed. Samples can be combined after thorough mixing to enable examination of a single composite sample for the herd.  Refrigeration is important for sample integrity; unless refrigerated, helminth eggs can develop and hatch in samples collected in the morning and not returned to the laboratory until the end of the day.  The same qualitative fecal examination methods described above for small animals are used in horses and production animals.  Quantitative fecal egg count (FEC) methods are also used in large animal practice. FECs are a necessary tool for the early detection of anthelmintic resistance, and they are the cornerstone upon which selective programs in equine parasite control are based.  The Cornell-Wisconsin (double-centrifugation)and McMaster methods are available for obtaining FECs in production animals. The mini-FLOTAC device is a newer apparatus for fecal egg detection that is now commercially available in the US.  The Cornell-Wisconsin double-centrifugation technique is the most sensitive FEC method and should be used only when relatively low counts are expected (as with adult cattle or camelids). At counts of > 100 eggs per gram (EPG), counting fatigue negatively affects FEC accuracy. In such situations, more accurate counts will be achieved using a dilution method such as the McMaster count.  The mini-FLOTAC procedure is more sensitive than the McMaster method; however, it is also more time-consuming.  In ruminants, these FEC methods can be used to estimate relative infection burden for nematodes of the “GI parasite complex” (eg, trichostrongylid eggs of cattle), while also detecting coccidia and other parasites, such as tapeworms. In horses, FECs are used mainly to quantify fecal shedding of strongylid eggs.  The Cornell-Wisconsin method consists of the following steps:  Three grams of fecal matter is placed in a container, suspended in approximately 15 mL of water, strained through a gauze square into a 15-mL tube, and centrifuged (270 g, 10 minutes).  The supernatant is poured off, and the sediment is mixed with saturated sugar solution, filling the tube enough to form a positive meniscus before a 22 × 22-mm coverslip is placed on the lip of the test tube.  The tube is centrifuged again at low speed (270 g, 5 minutes).  The coverslip, with the surface film containing eggs, is removed and transferred to a microscope slide to count trichostrongylid eggs in cattle, sheep, goat, or camelid feces.  The total is divided by 3 to derive the EPG.  Other parasites are noted, if present, and assigned a general abundance designation of +1 (few), +2 (small number), +3 (large number), or +4 (too numerous to count).  When FECs are likely to be high (> 100 EPG), the McMaster or mini-FLOTAC method is recommended. Both methods use a calibrated slide or chamber and sugar flotation medium. A saturated solution of table salt (specific gravity 1.20) is an inexpensive alternative medium for diagnosing production animal parasites; however, salt can be highly corrosive to metal surfaces. Magnesium sulfate (specific gravity 1.20) is the preferred medium for swine feces.  McMaster slides contain two chambers with etched areas of known volume (see McMaster slide image) that are used to estimate the EPG and are frequently used for FECs in horses and small ruminants. The McMaster method proceeds as follows:  Fecal matter (4 g) mixed with sugar flotation medium (56 mL) is strained (through cheesecloth or tea strainer).  After thorough mixing, the solution is introduced into each chamber with a Pasteur pipette.  The eggs within the marked grid are counted under low-power magnification (10X objective).  McMaster egg-counting slide   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Each chamber of the McMaster slide has a volume of 0.15 mL under the etched grid. Because two chambers are examined, 0.3 mL is evaluated from the total sample volume of 60 mL (ie, the total sample is 200 times greater than the portion examined). For example, if 4 g of fecal matter is mixed with 56 mL of sugar solution, then each egg counted is multiplied by 50 (ie, the factor of 200 noted above, divided by 4 g of feces in the original sample) to yield the EPG in the fecal sample (ie, the sensitivity is 50 EPG). In horses, the sensitivity can be increased to 25 EPG by using 4 g of feces in half the volume (26 mL) of sugar solution; the total number of eggs counted on the slide (in chambers 1 and 2) is still multiplied by 50 to yield the EPG.  Acceptable correlation between the EPG and the relative worm burden is often possible in young animals; adult animals, however, typically have low (< 5 EPG) or zero counts.  In young cattle, which generally have EPG counts 10 times higher than those of adult animals, EPG counts > 50 reflect a moderate infection, and EPG counts > 500 indicate a heavy burden and a need for treatment. There is no consensus on the exact number; however, treatment thresholds of ≥ 250 EPG are often used for strongyle control programs in horses. For sheep and goats, an EPG count > 5,000 is considered high and warrants treatment.  Because fluke eggs do not float readily, quantitative fecal sedimentation procedures are usually used:  Two grams of fecal matter is mixed with 35 mL of soapy solution (2% liquid detergent) and strained through gauze into a 50-mL centrifuge tube.  The tube is filled with soapy water and allowed to stand for 3 minutes, after which half of the supernatant is discarded.  This procedure is repeated two or three times, until the supernatant is clean.  All but 15 mL is poured off, and two drops of new methylene blue are added.  The eggs are counted with a dissecting microscope in a gridded Petri dish or by examining several coverslipped microscope slides of the new methylene blue mixture.  The eggs of the liver fluke Fasciola hepatica can be differentiated from those of Paramphistomum rumen flukes by their golden color, more distinct barrel shape, and slightly greater size, compared with the gray color, more pointy end, and lesser size of the usually nonpathogenic rumen fluke eggs. Commercial sieve-sediment kits can decrease sample preparation time by 50%.  In cattle, Fasciola EPG counts of > 3 suggest economic losses, and an EPG count of > 10 might be associated with clinical signs. Overview of Hematopoietic System in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jan 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (1) Tables (0) Videos (0) The hematopoietic system is the organ system comprising the blood and tissues responsible for blood cell generation through the process of hematopoiesis (see figure illustrating normal hematopoiesis).  Normal hematopoiesis   Image Courtesy of Teton NewMedia.  The cellular elements of blood deliver oxygen to cells (RBCs), protect against foreign organisms and antigens (WBCs), and initiate coagulation (platelets), whereas the noncellular component of blood (plasma) supplies cells with water, electrolytes, nutrients, and hormones and removes waste products.  Because of the hematopoietic system's diversity, its diseases are best discussed from a functional perspective. Functions can be classified as either appropriate responses to abnormal situations (eg, leukocytosis and left shift in response to inflammation) or primary abnormalities of the hematopoietic system (eg, pancytopenia from bone marrow dysfunction). Furthermore, abnormalities can be quantitative (ie, too many or too few cells) or qualitative (ie, abnormalities in function). (Also see The Biology of the Immune System.) Red Blood Cells in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jan 2025 | Modified May 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Key Points | For More Information Erythrocytes (RBCs) are largely produced from hematopoietic stem cells in bone marrow.  In most mammals, mature RBCs have a biconcave disk shape and lack a nucleus. Nucleated red blood cells (nRBCs), or erythroblasts, are immature RBCs that have not undergone nuclear extrusion and still contain a nucleus. Camelid RBCs are elliptical. Mature RBCs in birds are large oval cells containing oval nuclei.  The function of RBCs is to carry oxygen to tissues at pressures sufficient to permit its rapid diffusion. This process requires the following biological elements:  a carrier molecule (hemoglobin)  a vehicle (RBCs) capable of bringing intact hemoglobin (Hgb) to cells  a metabolism geared to protect both RBCs and Hgb from damage  Interference with synthesis or release of Hgb, production or survival of RBCs, or metabolism can cause disease.  Hgb is a complex molecule, formed of 4 heme units attached to 4 globins (2 alpha and 2 beta globins). Iron is added in the last step of erythropoiesis by the ferrochelatase enzyme.  Interference with normal production of heme or globin (such as with lead poisoning or deficiency of copper or iron) leads to anemia.  Hemoglobinopathies such as thalassemia and sickle cell disease, important genetic diseases of humans, have not been observed in other animals. In these diseases, production of globins (alpha, beta, or both) does not balance heme production, and Hgb is not functional.  The only known naturally occurring hemoglobinopathy of animals is porphyria. Although described in several species, porphyria is most important as a cause of photosensitivity in cattle.  RBC mass, and thus oxygen-carrying capacity, remains constant over time in healthy animals. A decreased RBC mass (anemia) can be caused by blood loss, excess destruction of RBCs (hemolysis), or decreased production of RBCs.  Once produced in bone marrow, mature RBCs have a finite lifespan in circulation before senescent RBCs are destroyed. RBC production and destruction must be carefully balanced to avoid both anemia and erythrocytosis (excess RBCs in circulation).  Erythropoiesis (RBC production) is regulated by erythropoietin, a hormone that increases in the presence of hypoxia. Erythropoietin acts on bone marrow in concert with other humoral mediators to increase the number of stem cells entering RBC production, shorten maturation time, and cause early release of reticulocytes (immature RBCs).  In most species, the kidney is both the sensor organ and the major site of erythropoietin production. Chronic kidney disease can be associated with anemia in later stages, as the kidneys fail to produce this vital hormone in sufficient amounts.  Nutrient deficiency (eg, of iron, folate, or vitamin B12) can also suppress erythropoiesis, as can chronic debilitating diseases, inflammatory diseases, and endocrine disorders (such as hypothyroidism, hypoadrenocorticism, or hyperestrogenism).  Toxic insult, infectious diseases (eg, feline leukemia virus disease, histoplasmosis), and neoplasms within bone marrow (eg, myelofibrosis) can all primarily affect the bone marrow, leading to decreased erythropoiesis with or without other cytopenias. Each of the conditions mentioned here would be expected to cause nonregenerative anemia.  To balance RBC production, two mechanisms exist for removal of senescent RBCs: intravascular and extravascular hemolysis. Both conserve the principal constituents of the cell for reuse.  Removal of aged RBCs normally occurs by phagocytosis by fixed macrophages in the spleen. As RBCs age, they change antigenically, acquiring senescent antigens and losing flexibility because of impaired ATP production. Both of these changes increase the chance that the cells will become trapped in the spleen and removed by macrophages.  After phagocytosis and subsequent disruption of the cell membrane, Hgb is converted to heme and globin. Iron is released from the heme moiety and either stored in the macrophage as ferritin or hemosiderin or released into the circulation for transport back to the marrow. The remaining heme is converted to bilirubin, which is released by macrophages into the systemic circulation, where it complexes with albumin for transport to hepatocytes. In the liver, it is conjugated and excreted into the bile.  This normal process of extravascular hemolysis of aged RBCs occurs at a low rate every day, thereby accounting for the low bilirubin concentrations measurable in blood in healthy animals. In diseases causing excess extravascular hemolysis, RBCs may be destroyed before they are senescent, resulting in a shortened RBC lifespan, anemia, and hyperbilirubinemia.  In animals in good health, approximately 1% of aging RBCs are hemolyzed within circulation (intravascular hemolysis) instead of within the spleen. In this process, free Hgb is released and quickly converted to Hgb dimers that bind to haptoglobin and are transported to the liver. There, they are metabolized in the same manner as products from RBCs removed by phagocytosis.  In diseases causing excess intravascular hemolysis, increased numbers of RBCs are destroyed in the circulation, releasing hemoglobin at a rate that exceeds haptoglobin's binding capacity. This process results in excess hemoglobinemia, which may be detectable as hemolyzed-looking serum. Excess Hgb and, therefore, iron are excreted in the urine (hemoglobinuria).  The principal metabolic pathway of RBCs is glycolysis, and the main energy source for this in most species is glucose. Glucose enters RBCs by an insulin-independent mechanism, and most is metabolized to produce ATP and reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). The energy of ATP is used to fuel RBC membrane pumps that work to preserve cell shape and flexibility.  The reducing potential of NADH is utilized via the methemoglobin reductase pathway to maintain iron in Hgb in its reduced form (Fe2+). Glucose not used in glycolysis is metabolized via a second pathway, the hexose monophosphate (HMP) shunt, which does not produce energy but is important for maintaining the sulfhydryl groups of globin in their reduced state.  These metabolic pathways are key for the survival and functionality of RBCs as they circulate. Some anemic disorders are the direct result of abnormal RBC metabolism and interference with glycolysis.  Inherited deficiency of pyruvate kinase, a key glycolytic enzyme, causes ATP deficiency, which leads to decreased RBC lifespan and hemolytic anemia.  Excessive oxidant stress can overload the protective HMP shunt or methemoglobin reductase pathways, causing Heinz body hemolysis or methemoglobin formation, respectively. Hemolytic anemia caused by acetaminophen toxicity in cats is an example.  While anemia can be caused by RBC loss (bleeding or excess hemolysis) or lack of production, absolute erythrocytosis, by contrast, is generally the result of excess RBC production rather than failure to clear senescent RBCs.  Erythrocytosis can be a primary problem of the bone marrow (polycythemia vera) or a secondary problem, resulting from dysfunction outside of the bone marrow.  When secondary, erythrocytosis may be an appropriate, compensatory response to try to increase oxygen-carrying capacity in chronic hypoxic states (eg, pulmonary disease, right-to-left intracardiac shunts), or it may be an inappropriate response, as is the case with erythropoietin-producing neoplasms.  Relative erythrocytosis is the term used to describe increased RBC mass relative to plasma, which most commonly results from dehydration (hemoconcentration) or splenic contraction.  Key Points RBC production is regulated by the hormone erythropoietin, which is released as needed by the kidneys.  Senescent RBCs are removed primarily by macrophages in the spleen.  Anemia is caused by blood loss, excess hemolysis, or decreased production of RBCs. White Blood Cells in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jan 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Phagocytes | Lymphocytes | Key Points | For More Information Major types of circulating WBCs, or leukocytes, include neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils, lymphocytes, and monocytes. These WBC types can be further classified according to specific characteristics.  Granulocytes are characterized by the presence of cytoplasmic granules (specialized secretory vesicles containing various cytotoxic molecules, enzymes, and peptides). Neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils are granulocytes that have lobulated nuclei and are classified according to the staining characteristics of their cytoplasmic granules as neutral (neutrophils), red or pink (eosinophils), or lavender or purple (basophils). Mast cells are another type of granulocytic leukocyte that has a round, rather than lobulated, purple nucleus.  Some veterinary species (eg, rabbits and guinea pigs) have a WBC type called heterophils. Heterophils are analogous to neutrophils in other species but have eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules. Cytologically, they can be difficult to distinguish from eosinophils. The cellular equivalents to neutrophils in birds and reptiles are also called heterophils and have eosinophilic granules.  Phagocytes are characterized by participation in phagocytosis, the process of engulfing and destroying particles such as invading microorganisms or debris. Neutrophils, macrophages, and dendritic cells are considered professional phagocytes, while other types of cells may participate in phagocytosis to a lesser extent.  Cells can also be classified according to the shape of their nucleus. Mature neutrophils, as well as eosinophils and basophils, have a segmented nucleus and thus are known as polymorphonuclear cells. This is in contrast to mononuclear phagocytes (monocytes and macrophages) as well as lymphocytes, which prototypically have a round nucleus. However, monocytes can sometimes have a pseudolobulated nucleus, resembling that of a neutrophil.  Band neutrophils are a type of immature neutrophil distinguished from mature neutrophils by a lack of clear segmentation in the shape of the nucleus. Other neutrophil precursors include myelocytes and metamyelocytes, which are classified by their stage of maturation.  Reptiles have a type of mononuclear cell, thought to be a monocyte variant, called an azurophil. Birds, in contrast, lack azurophils.   Mononuclear phagocytes arise primarily from bone marrow and are released into blood as monocytes. They can circulate for up to a few days before entering tissues and differentiating into macrophages.  Neutrophils circulate for only a few hours before traveling to tissues. (See also Physiology of Leukocytes in Animals.)  Phagocytes in Animals The principal function of phagocytes is to defend against invading microorganisms by ingesting and destroying them, thus contributing to cellular inflammatory responses.  The process of phagocytosis can be divided into five distinct stages:  Attraction of phagocytes (chemotaxis) to microorganisms, antigen-antibody complexes, and other inflammatory mediators  Attachment to the organism  Ingestion  Fusion of cell lysosomes with ingested microorganisms and bacterial killing  Digestion  In addition, many phagocytes have other specialized functions.  Functions of the immune system can be divided broadly into the innate immune system, which is rapid but nonspecific, and the adaptive immune system, which is slower but more specific toward specific pathogenic stimuli. The adaptive immune system can be further divided into cellular and humoral components. There is substantial cross-talk among these functional units of the immune system.  Monocytes form a link to the adaptive immune system by processing antigen for presentation to lymphocytes and by producing substances such as IL-1, which initiates fever and lymphocyte activation and stimulates the development of early hematopoietic progenitors.  Eosinophils, while having a role as phagocytes, also have more specific functions that include defending against metazoan parasites and modulating the inflammatory process. They respond chemotactically to histamine, immune complexes, and eosinophil chemotactic factor of anaphylaxis, a substance released by degranulating mast cells.  Basophils are not true phagocytes but contain large amounts of histamine and other inflammatory mediators.  Eosinophilia and basophilia may occur in response to systemic allergic reactions and to tissue invasion by parasites.  As with RBCs, production and circulating numbers of phagocytes are tightly regulated and controlled by various humoral factors, including colony-stimulating factors and interleukins.  Unlike RBCs, which remain circulating in blood, phagocytes use this compartment as a pathway to tissues. Consequently, the number of phagocytes in blood reflects circumstances in the tissues (eg, inflammation) as well as the proliferative function of bone marrow. The sensitivity with which phagocytes respond to these conditions varies from species to species.  While neutrophilia is most commonly expected with tissue inflammation and infection, neutropenia can occur with overwhelming tissue demand, and some cases of neutropenia in dogs may be immune mediated. Regardless of the cause, severe neutropenia is likely to result in bacterial infection.  Finally, phagocyte precursors may undergo malignant transformation, which results in acute or chronic myelogenous leukemia.  Lymphocytes in Animals Lymphocytes are responsible for both humoral and cellular immunity. Cells of these two branches of the immune system cannot be differentiated morphologically; however, they differ in their dynamics of production and circulation.  Lymphocyte production in mammals originates in bone marrow. Some lymphocytes destined to be involved in cellular immunity migrate to the thymus and differentiate further under the influence of thymic hormones. These become T cells and are responsible for a variety of helper or cytotoxic immunological functions. Most circulating lymphocytes are T cells, but T cells are also present in spleen and lymph nodes.  B cells, on the other hand, migrate directly to organs without undergoing modification in the thymus and are responsible for humoral immunity (antibody production). (See also Physiology of Leukocytes in Animals.)  Thus, lymphoid organs have populations of both B and T lymphocytes. In lymph nodes, follicular centers are primarily comprised of B cells, while parafollicular zones are primarily comprised of T cells. In the spleen, most lymphocytes of the red pulp are B cells, whereas those of the periarteriolar lymphoid sheaths are T cells. Close association of T cells and B cells within lymphoid organs is essential to immune function.  Lymphocyte function in the cellular immune system features both afferent (receptor) and efferent (effector) components. Long-lived T cells of the peripheral blood are receptors. In response to antigens to which they have been previously sensitized, they leave the circulation and undergo blast transformation to form activated T cells, which in turn cause other T cells to undergo blast transformation, both locally and systemically. Stimulated T cells produce lymphokines with a wide range of activities, such as attraction and activation of neutrophils, macrophages, and lymphocytes.  The humoral immune system is composed of B cells that produce several classes of antibodies. When sensitized B cells encounter antigen, they divide and differentiate into plasma cells that produce antibody. Therefore, each initially stimulated B cell produces a clone of plasma cells, all producing the same specific antibody.  Antibody molecules (immunoglobulins) fall into several classes, each with its own functional characteristics:  IgA is the principal antibody of respiratory and intestinal secretions.  IgM is the first antibody produced in response to a newly recognized antigen.  IgG is the principal antibody in circulating blood.  IgE is the principal antibody involved in allergic reactions.  Antibodies perform their functions by combining with specific antigens that stimulated their production. Antigen-antibody complexes can be chemotactic for phagocytes, or they can activate complement, a process that produces both cell lysis and substances chemotactic for neutrophils and macrophages. In this manner, the humoral immune system is related to, and interacts with, the innate immune system.  The humoral immune system is also related to both the innate immune system and the cellular immune system in other ways. Both helper (CD4) and cytotoxic (CD8)T-cell classes have been described:  Helper T cells recognize processed antigen and activate the humoral immune response.  Cytotoxic T cells, after sensitization by antigen, are effector cells, which are especially important in antiviral immunity.  Natural killer cells, a class of lymphocyte distinct from T cells and B cells, destroy foreign cells (eg, neoplastic cells), even without prior sensitization.  Antigen processing by macrophages precedes recognition of an antigen by lymphocytes. These complex processes are involved in routine surveillance against neoplastic cells and recognition of normal “self” cells.  Lymphocyte response in disease may be appropriate (activation of the immune system to defend against microorganisms) or inappropriate (immune-mediated disease and lymphoproliferative malignancies). (Also see The Biology of the Immune System.)  Immune-mediated disease results from the immune system's failure to recognize host tissues as normal self cells. For example, in immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, antibodies are produced against the host’s own RBCs.  Another inappropriate immune system response is allergy. In allergic individuals, IgE antibodies against allergens bind to the surface of basophils and mast cells. When exposure to an allergen occurs, antigen-antibody complexes form, and degranulation of mast cells and basophils releases vasoactive amines. Reaction to this can be mild (as in urticaria or atopy) or life-threatening (as in anaphylaxis).  Lymphocytosis occurs in some species, especially cats, as a response to epinephrine secretion; lymphocytosis, therefore, may be nonspecific in this species and be accompanied by stress and a wide array of illnesses. Atypical lymphocytes may be present in the blood in response to antigenic stimulation (eg, vaccination). Persistent lymphocytosis in cattle infected with bovine leukemia virus is a benign polyclonal increase in lymphocyte numbers.  Lymphoproliferative malignancies include lymphomas and acute lymphoblastic and chronic lymphocytic leukemias. Lymphopenia may occur most commonly in response to glucocorticoid secretion (stress, illness, hyperadrenocorticism) or exogenous corticosteroid medications. (See also Leukogram Abnormalities in Animals.)  Key Points Phagocytes include granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils), which circulate briefly, enter tissues, and have a short lifespan, and monocytes, which can persist for a long time in tissues as macrophages.  T lymphocytes may be helper (CD4) T cells, which process antigens and interact with humoral antibody production, or cytotoxic (CD8) T cells, which act, when sensitized, against specific antigens.  B lymphocytes differentiate into plasma cells and produce antibodies.  Natural killer lymphocytes destroy foreign cells (eg, neoplastic cells or those of transplanted organs). Platelets in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jan 2025 | Modified May 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (3) Tables (0) Videos (0) Platelets form the initial hemostatic plug whenever hemorrhage occurs. They also are the source of phospholipid needed for the interaction of coagulation factors to form a fibrin clot. Hemostasis is therefore broadly divided into primary hemostasis, ending in the formation of a platelet plug; secondary hemostasis, ending in the formation of a fibrin clot; and tertiary hemostasis, or fibrinolysis, ending in resolution or lysis of the clot. (Also see Hemostatic Disorders in Animals.)  Platelets are produced in bone marrow from megakaryocytes, under the influence of the hormone thrombopoietin. Beginning with invagination of the megakaryocyte cell membrane, platelet production results from subsequent fragmentation of megakaryocytes into individual platelets. (See images of cat, horse, and cow platelets.)  In contrast, thrombocytes in birds (which do not have platelets) are small cells with a round nucleus.  Blood smear, platelets, cat   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Blood smear, platelets, horse   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Blood smear, platelets, cow   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  When vessel walls are damaged, collagen and tissue factor are exposed. Circulating platelets adhere to the endothelium via von Willebrand factor, undergo a shape change, and release ADP. Local aggregation of more platelets is stimulated by ADP, resulting in the formation of a primary hemostatic plug—a platelet plug. Ultimately, local accumulation of fibrin and platelets is known as a fibrin clot, which is needed for effective hemostasis at injury sites.  Clot formation is a necessary protective mechanism to stop or prevent bleeding; however, conditions of inappropriate thrombosis (clot formation) can jeopardize health (see Thrombosis, Embolism, and Aneurysm in Animals).  Platelet disorders are either quantitative (thrombocytopenia or thrombocytosis) or qualitative (thrombocytopathy).  Thrombocytopenia is one of the most common bleeding disorders of animals. In general, platelet counts must fall to < 30,000 platelets/mcL before the risk of spontaneous hemorrhage increases, though hemorrhage from minor trauma (venipuncture, cystocentesis) can occur with platelet counts in the range of 30,000–50,000 platelets/mcL. Spontaneous bleeding from severe thrombocytopenia (or thrombopathia) most commonly manifests as mucosal site (eg, gingiva, GI tract, urinary bladder, nasal passages, or eyes) bleeding or bruising (eg, petechiae, ecchymoses).  Consumption, destruction, or sequestration of platelets causes thrombocytopenia associated with increased platelet production by the bone marrow:  Consumptive thrombocytopenia occurs with massive hemorrhage or with DIC, secondary to a variety of diseases.  Destruction occurs in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, in which platelets become coated with antiplatelet antibodies and are removed from the circulation by the fixed phagocyte system.  Excessive sequestration of platelets by an enlarged spleen (hypersplenism) can occur in conditions such as myeloproliferative diseases.  Decreased production of platelets in the marrow can be caused by drugs, toxins, or primary marrow disorders such as aplasia, fibrosis, or hematopoietic malignancy. In primary marrow disorders, more than one hematopoietic cell line is often decreased, resulting in bicytopenia or pancytopenia.  Congenital macrothrombocytopenia is a hereditary disorder of platelet division during the maturation process. This disorder results in thrombocytopenia (decreased numbers of individual platelets) with preservation of overall platelet mass, as fewer, but larger, platelets are produced; pathological bleeding is uncommon with this disorder. Cavalier King Charles Spaniels are commonly affected, and a genetic test is available.  Platelet activation during blood collection can cause platelets to clump; hematology analyzers can then provide erroneously low platelet counts, especially in cats. Blood film analysis to assess for platelet clumps is important in determining whether low machine-generated platelet counts are accurate.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Due to clumping, hematology analyzers can provide falsely low platelet counts, especially in cats.  Thrombocytopathies comprise a poorly defined group of diseases in which platelet numbers are normal but their function is impaired. Von Willebrand disease is characterized by a deficiency or malfunction of von Willebrand factor, which decreases platelet adhesion to the endothelium and impairs platelet plug formation. While von Willebrand disease is a primary hemostatic disorder that results in bleeding, platelets themselves are normal. Other hereditary disorders of platelet function have been described but are relatively rare.  Certain infections (feline leukemia virus, ehrlichiosis) and diseases (chronic kidney disease, liver failure) can also impair platelet function, in addition to disrupting the hematopoietic and coagulation systems in other ways. Aspirin administration causes a platelet function defect through its irreversible inhibition of thromboxane (which is necessary for platelet aggregation). Clopidogrel also irreversibly inhibits platelet function by binding an ADP receptor subtype necessary for platelet aggregation.  Thrombocytosis (increased platelet number) may be associated with primary marrow disease, such as in megakaryocytic leukemia (rare), chronic blood loss and iron deficiency, or chronic excess corticosteroid exposure (hyperadrenocorticism or exogenous corticosteroid medication).  Key Points Platelets are produced from megakaryocytes and form the first stage of coagulation (the hemostatic or platelet plug) when a blood vessel is damaged. Fibrin forms in the presence of aggregated platelets, leading to clot formation.  Bleeding associated with thrombocytopenia is often characterized by petechiae, ecchymoses, or mucosal bleeding.  Platelet function disorders are relatively rare and may be inherited or acquired. Overview of Anemia in Animals ByAllison Kendall, DVM, MS, DACVIM, North Carolina State University Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jul 2024 View the Pet Owner Version Anemia is an absolute decrease in RBC numbers, hemoglobin concentration, or PCV. Clinical signs include pale mucous membranes, increased heart rate, and hypotension. Diagnosis can be based on CBC but should be confirmed by additional tests. Treatment can be supportive but often requires addressing the underlying cause. Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (2) Tables (1) Videos (0)  Anemia can be due to loss, destruction, or lack of production of RBCs. On the basis of clinicopathological evidence of a compensatory response by the bone marrow, anemia can be classified as regenerative or nonregenerative (see the table Assessment of Regeneration in Anemia).  With regenerative anemia, the bone marrow responds appropriately to the decreased red cell mass by increasing RBC production and releasing reticulocytes. Anemia due to hemorrhage or hemolysis is typically regenerative. A regenerative response takes 3–5 days from the onset of anemia.  With nonregenerative anemia, the bone marrow responds inadequately to the increased need for RBCs. Anemia due to decreased erythropoietin or an abnormality in the bone marrow is nonregenerative. Anemia due to acute hemorrhage or hemolysis initially appears nonregenerative until there has been enough time for a regenerative response.  Pearls & Pitfalls  A regenerative response takes 3–5 days from the onset of anemia.  Table Assessment of Regeneration in Anemia Clinical Findings of Anemia in Animals Clinical signs of anemia depend on the extent of the condition, the duration (acute or chronic), and the underlying cause.  Acute Anemia Acute anemia can result in shock and even death if more than a third of the blood volume is lost rapidly and not replaced. In acute blood loss, the following clinical signs are common:  tachycardia  pale mucous membranes  bounding or weak peripheral pulses  hypotension  The cause of the blood loss can be overt (eg, trauma) or occult. If no evidence of external bleeding is found, a source of internal or occult blood loss must be sought; examples include ruptured splenic tumor, other neoplasia, coagulopathy, GI ulceration, and parasites. Hemolysis can result in icterus.  Chronic Anemia Animals with chronic anemia have had time to accommodate, and their clinical presentation is usually more vague, with signs such as the following:  lethargy  weakness  anorexia  Patients with acute or chronic anemia can show similar clinical signs, such as pale mucous membranes and weak peripheral pulses. The lack of expected clinical signs can indicate the time frame of the condition. Splenomegaly, abdominal distention, or heart murmur can be present, depending on the underlying cause of anemia.  Diagnosis of Anemia in Animals Clinical Evaluation A complete history is an important part of evaluating a patient with anemia. Questions covered might include duration of clinical signs, history of exposure to toxins (eg, rodenticides, heavy metals, toxic plants), drug treatments, vaccinations, travel history, and prior illnesses.  Serological Testing A CBC, including platelet and reticulocyte counts, provides information on the severity of anemia and the extent of the bone marrow response, and enables the evaluation of other cell lines.  A blood smear should be evaluated for abnormalities in RBC morphology or size, evidence of agglutination, and RBC parasites. The RBC indices (measures of size and hemoglobin concentration) are calculated by automated cell counters calibrated for the species being examined.  RBC size is expressed by the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in femtoliters and can reflect the extent of regeneration.  Macrocytosis (increased MCV) usually correlates with regenerative anemia (see the table Assessment of Regeneration in Anemia). Macrocytosis can also be due to defects in DNA synthesis or nuclear maturation, as in cobalamin (vitamin B12) deficiency or in cats with myelodysplasia caused by feline leukemia virus. In addition, macrocytosis can be a heritable condition in Poodles without anemia.  Microcytosis (decreased MCV) is the hallmark of iron-deficiency anemia and can also be heritable in Akitas.  The hemoglobin concentration of each RBC, measured in grams per deciliter, is defined as the mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC).  Abnormalities in RBC morphology, such as basophilic stippling, can indicate lead poisoning. The formation of Heinz bodies (see Heinz body images) indicates oxidative injury to the RBCs, secondary to toxin exposure (see the table Toxic Causes of Anemia). Cats are more susceptible to Heinz body formation than are other species; even cats without anemia can have a small number of Heinz bodies.  Heinz bodies, cat   Image Courtesy of Dr. Devorah Stowe.  The presence of schistocytes or spherocytes (see spherocyte image) can also help identify the pathophysiological process associated with the cause of anemia (eg, spherocytes are evident in cases of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia).  Spherocytes, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Devorah Stowe.  The reticulocyte count is usually reported as a percentage of the RBC mass. This value should be corrected for the extent of anemia to evaluate the extent of regeneration. An absolute reticulocyte count (measured as RBCs per microliter × reticulocyte percentage) of > 50,000 reticulocytes/mcL in cats or > 60,000 reticulocytes/mcL in dogs is considered regenerative. A corrected reticulocyte percentage > 1% indicates regeneration in dogs and cats (see the table Assessment of Regeneration in Anemia). Corrected reticulocyte percentage is calculated as the observed reticulocyte percentage multiplied by the ratio of the patient’s PCV to the normal PCV for that species.  After acute blood loss or hemolytic crisis, reticulocytosis usually takes 3–4 days to become evident.  Plasma or total protein concentration is also useful for further classifying the cause of anemia. The plasma protein concentration is often low with blood loss but normal (or elevated) in cases of hemolysis and decreased production.  A serum chemistry panel and urinalysis can be used to evaluate organ function. If GI blood loss is suspected, an elevation in BUN or decrease in albumin can be noted, or an examination of the feces for blood and parasites can be useful. With hemolytic anemia, total bilirubin can be elevated.  Radiographic examination can help identify occult disease, such as zinc toxicosis due to the presence of a penny in the stomach of a puppy with hemolytic anemia.  Bruising or bleeding can be a sign of a coagulopathy and indicate the need for a coagulation profile. Petechiae or ecchymotic hemorrhage suggests substantial thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathy.  If anemia due to hemolysis is suspected, blood can be evaluated for autoagglutination, or a direct agglutination test (Coombs test) might be indicated (see Anemia Due to Hemolysis).  Serological tests and PCR assays for infectious agents such as feline leukemia virus, Ehrlichia (which causes ehrlichiosis), equine infectious anemia virus, and Babesia (which causes babesiosis) can also help define the cause of anemia (see the table Infectious Causes of Anemia).  Bone marrow evaluation by aspiration or biopsy is indicated in animals with an unexplained, nonregenerative anemia. If the CBC reveals a decrease in more than one cell line, possibly indicating hypoplastic marrow, a biopsy is indicated, along with aspiration.  Biopsy and aspiration are complementary: biopsies are better to evaluate the architecture and extent of cellularity of the marrow; aspiration enables better evaluation of cellular morphology. Aspiration also enables evaluation of the orderly maturation of RBC and WBC lines, the ratio of myeloid to erythroid precursors (M:E ratio), and the number of platelet precursors. Iron stores can also be evaluated by means of Prussian blue staining.  An M:E ratio < 1 indicates that RBC production is greater than WBC production; an M:E ratio > 1 indicates the opposite. The M:E ratio is always interpreted in light of a recent CBC, because changes in the ratio could also be due to suppression of one cell line compared with the other.  Key Points Anemia can be classified on the basis of chronicity, severity, regenerative response, and RBC indices.  Plasma protein concentration should also be used in classifying the underlying cause of anemia.  Clinical signs depend on the severity and duration (acute versus chronic) of the anemia.  Bone marrow evaluation can be necessary for further characterization of nonregenerative anemia. Regenerative Anemias in Animals ByAllison Kendall, DVM, MS, DACVIM, North Carolina State University Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jul 2024 | Modified Jul 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Anemia Due to Blood Loss | Anemia Due to Hemolysis | Anemia Due to Toxins, Infections, or Heritable Diseases | Key Points | For More Information | References Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (3) Tables (2) Videos (0) Regenerative anemias include anemias due to blood loss, hemolysis (hemolytic anemias), toxins, infections, and heritable diseases.  Anemia Due to Blood Loss in Animals Blood loss anemia is typically regenerative (see blood smear images). Acute blood loss can lead to shock and even death if > 30%–40% of blood is lost and the resulting hypovolemia is not treated aggressively with IV fluid therapy, the administration of compatible blood products, or both.  Regenerative anemia, blood smears, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Causes of acute blood loss can be known (eg, trauma, surgery) or occult (eg, GI blood loss). Coagulopathies, bleeding tumors, gastric ulceration, and external or internal parasites should be excluded as causes. GI parasites, such as Haemonchus in ruminants and hookworms in dogs, can lead to severe blood loss, especially in young animals.  Low-grade, chronic blood loss eventually results in iron-deficiency anemia; however, some reticulocytosis can persist after iron stores have become depleted.  The hallmark of iron-deficiency anemia is microcytic, hypochromic anemia. This chronic blood loss can be due to some type of parasitism in young animals (eg, fleas, lice, intestinal parasitism); in older animals, however, bleeding from GI ulcers or tumors is more common.  Anemia Due to Hemolysis in Animals Hemolytic anemia results from the destruction of RBCs.  Hemolytic anemias are typically regenerative and result from the lysis of RBCs in either the intra- or extravascular space. Intravascular hemolysis results in hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria; extravascular hemolysis does not.  Both types of hemolysis can result in icterus. In dogs, the most common cause of hemolytic anemia is immune mediated (60%–75% of cases). Toxins, RBC trauma, infections, neoplasia, and RBC membrane defects can also cause hemolysis.  Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) can be primary (idiopathic) or secondary to neoplasia, infectious agents, inflammatory diseases, drugs, or vaccinations. The ACVIM consensus statement on IMHA diagnosis in dogs and cats recommends a full diagnostic workup that includes infectious disease testing.  In IMHA, the immune system no longer recognizes RBCs as self, and it develops antibodies against circulating RBCs, leading to RBC destruction by macrophages and complement. In some cases, antibodies are directed against RBC precursors in the marrow, resulting in nonregenerative anemia.  Clinical Signs Animals with IMHA usually have icterus, sometimes have fever, and can have splenomegaly.  Diagnosis The following clinical signs and diagnostic test results are hematological hallmarks of IMHA:  regenerative anemia  hyperbilirubinemia  spherocytosis  autoagglutination (see agglutination image)  a positive Coombs test result  Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, agglutination   Image Courtesy of Dr. Robert Jacobs.  A definitive diagnosis of IMHA requires at least two clinical signs of immune-mediated destruction (spherocytosis, autoagglutination, or a positive Coombs test result) and at least one clinical sign of hemolysis (hyperbilirubinemia, hemoglobinemia, or hemoglobinuria).  When blood is placed in an EDTA tube or onto a microscope slide, autoagglutination can be appreciated as red blood cells sticking together in three-dimensional clumps. To distinguish autoagglutination from overlapping rouleaux formation or other pseudoagglutination, a saline agglutination test (also called slide agglutination test or saline dispersion test) can be performed:  A drop of saline solution (0.9% NaCl) is placed on a microscope slide with a fresh drop of the animal's blood.  The slide should be gently rotated to mix the drops together.  The slide should be evaluated grossly for macroagglutination (see agglutination image). For microagglutination, a 1:4 or 1:10 dilution of blood to saline solution can be evaluated microscopically as a wet mount.  Animals with IMHA that do not demonstrate autoagglutination can still test positive on a direct agglutination test (Coombs test). Confirmatory testing should be performed before treatment for IMHA is initiated.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Confirmatory testing (Coombs test or flow cytometry) is recommended before immunosuppressive therapy is initiated.  A Coombs test detects antibodies or complement on the erythrocyte surface. Results must be interpreted in light of the sensitivity and specificity of the test. If there is clear evidence of IMHA (spherocytosis and true autoagglutination), a Coombs test may not be necessary.  Another technique used to evaluate patients for anti-RBC antibodies is flow cytometry, which enables the detection and quantitation of IgG and IgM bound to the surface of RBCs. Flow cytometry has been found to be 87%–92% specific for diagnosing patients with anti-RBC antibodies. However, it might not be readily available to all veterinary hospitals. The use of flow cytometry has been suggested to assess the response to treatment (1), because there is a decrease in surface anti-RBC antibodies before reticulocytosis or an increase in RBC count.  Treatment Patients with IMHA can show mild clinical signs or be in acute crisis. It is important to tailor treatment to the patient's clinical signs, including treating any underlying infections. Transfusion with packed RBCs is usually required.  The goal of IMHA treatment is to stop the destruction of RBCs by administering immunosuppressive drugs. Supportive care is also a priority.  Prednisone or prednisolone (2 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours) in dogs, and prednisolone (2–4 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours) in cats, is considered first-line treatment of IMHA. Dexamethasone (0.2–0.4 mg/kg, IV, every 24 hours) can be administered on a temporary basis to patients that will not eat or take oral medications.  Adjunctive immunosuppressive drugs are indicated in IMHA patients that have life-threatening disease, depend on transfusions, or are expected to develop severe adverse effects related to the use of glucocorticoids. Such adjunctive agents include the following (2):  mycophenolate (8–12 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours)  cyclosporine (5 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours)  azathioprine (2 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours, decreased after 2–3 weeks to 2 mg/kg every 48 hours) in dogs (note that azathioprine is contraindicated in cats and can be replaced by chlorambucil, which has been administered with anecdotal success at 0.1–0.2 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours)  The veterinary literature is ambiguous on how to select a drug adjunctive to corticosteroids and when to introduce it in the treatment of IMHA. The addition of second-line treatment must be tailored to the individual patient, with consideration of adverse effects.  Pulmonary thromboembolism is a risk in dogs with IMHA. These dogs are often hypercoagulable, which can be documented by thromboelastography.  Dogs documented to be in a hypercoagulable state should be anticoagulated with heparin, which, if the platelet count is > 40,000/mcL, can be administered in combination with an antiplatelet (aspirin at 1–2 mg/kg every 24 hours or clopidogrel at 1–4 mg/kg every 24 hours). The ACVIM consensus statement on IMHA treatment in dogs suggests that clopidogrel be administered in preference to aspirin.  The dosing range for heparin is wide and variable, and it depends on whether the heparin is fractionated or unfractionated. Heparin treatment can be monitored by measuring activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT) or antifactor Xa concentrations (low-molecular-weight heparin).  Thromboprophylaxis should be initiated at the time of diagnosis and continued until the patient is in remission and no longer receiving prednisone or prednisolone.  Mortality rates for IMHA range from 20% to 75%, depending on the severity of clinical signs and the extent of hypercoagulability. Negative prognostic indicators can include the following:  rapid drop in PCV  high bilirubin concentration  moderate to marked leukocytosis (28,000 to > 40,000 cells/mcL)  increased BUN concentration  petechiae  intravascular hemolysis  autoagglutination  disseminated intravascular coagulation  thromboembolic complications  Moderate to marked leukocytosis has been reported as associated with tissue necrosis, most likely secondary to tissue hypoxia or thromboembolic disease. Referral to tertiary care facilities and consideration of extracorporeal treatments (eg, plasmapheresis) can improve the outcome.  Alloimmune Hemolytic Anemia Alloimmune hemolytic anemia is caused by alloantibodies against nonself erythrocyte antigens. Examples include hemolytic transfusion reactions and neonatal isoerythrolysis.  Neonatal isoerythrolysis (NI) is an immune-mediated hemolytic disease that occurs in neonatal horses, mules, cattle, pigs, cats, and, rarely, dogs.  NI results when the neonate ingests maternal colostrum containing antibodies against one of the neonate’s blood group antigens. The maternal antibodies develop against specific foreign blood group antigens during previous pregnancies, as a result of unmatched transfusions, and from Babesia and Anaplasma vaccinations in cattle.  Cats are unique in that cats with blood type B have naturally occurring anti-A antibodies without prior exposure, and their kittens with blood type A develop hemolysis after nursing.  In horses, the antigens usually involved are A, C, and Q. NI occurs most commonly in Thoroughbreds and mules.  Neonates with NI are apparently normal at birth; however, they develop severe hemolytic anemia within 2–3 days and become weak and icteric (see icteric mucous membranes image).  Diagnosis is confirmed by screening of maternal serum, plasma, or colostrum and comparison to the paternal or neonatal RBCs.  Neonatal isoerythrolysis, icteric mucous membranes, foal   Image Courtesy of Dr. Thomas Lane.  Treatment of NI consists of stopping any colostrum, supportive care, and blood transfusions. If necessary, neonates can be transfused with triple-washed maternal RBCs.  NI can be avoided by withholding maternal colostrum and giving colostrum from a maternal source free of the antibodies. The newborn’s RBCs can be mixed with maternal serum to look for agglutination before the newborn is allowed to receive maternal colostrum.  Microangiopathic Hemolytic Anemia Microangiopathic hemolytic anemia results from RBC damage secondary to turbulent flow through abnormal vessels.  In dogs, it can occur secondary to severe heartworm infection, vascular tumors (hemangiosarcoma), splenic torsions, and disseminated intravascular coagulation.  Causes in other species include hemolytic uremic syndrome in calves, equine infectious anemia, African swine fever, and chronic classical swine fever.  Schistocytes are common in blood smears from animals with microangiopathic hemolytic anemia. Treatment is to correct the underlying disease process.  Metabolic Causes of Hemolytic Anemia Hypophosphatemia causes postparturient hemolysis and hemoglobinuria in cattle, sheep, and goats. It can occur 2–6 weeks after parturition.  In dogs and cats, hypophosphatemia with secondary hemolysis occurs secondary to diabetes mellitus, hepatic lipidosis, and refeeding syndrome. Oral or IV administration of phosphorus is indicated, depending on the extent of hypophosphatemia.  Cattle that drink too much water (water intoxication) are at risk of developing hemolysis secondary to hypotonic plasma. Such cases occur in calves 2–10 months old and lead to respiratory distress and hemoglobinuria. Clinical signs can progress to seizures and coma.  Diagnosis of water intoxication in calves is suggested by hemolytic anemia, hyponatremia and hypochloremia, decreased serum osmolality, and low urine specific gravity. Treatment consists of hypertonic fluids (eg, hypertonic saline solution [2.5% NaCl]) and diuretics (eg, mannitol).  Anemia Due to Toxins, Infections, or Heritable Diseases in Animals Toxins Toxins and drugs can cause anemia via many mechanisms. Those implicated most frequently in animals, along with their pathogenic mechanisms, are listed in the table Toxic Causes of Anemia.  Table Toxic Causes of Anemia Infections Many infectious agents can cause anemia by direct damage to RBCs, leading to hemolysis, or by direct effects on precursors in the bone marrow (see the table Infectious Causes of Anemia).  Table Infectious Causes of Anemia Heritable Diseases Several heritable RBC disorders lead to anemia.  Pyruvate kinase deficiencies occur in Basenjis, Beagles, West Highland White Terriers, Cairn Terriers, and other dog breeds, as well as Abyssinian and Somali cats. There is no treatment for pyruvate kinase deficiency.  Dogs with pyruvate kinase deficiency have a shortened lifespan because of myelofibrosis and osteosclerosis of the bone marrow. Affected cats have chronic intermittent hemolytic anemia, which is sometimes helped by splenectomy and corticosteroids. Cats have not been reported to develop osteosclerosis.  Phosphofructokinase deficiency occurs in English Springer Spaniels. Deficiencies in these enzymes lead to shortened RBC lifespan and regenerative anemia. In dogs with phosphofructokinase deficiency, the hemolytic crises are set off by alkalosis secondary to excessive excitement or exercise. If such situations are minimized, affected dogs can have a normal life expectancy.  A hereditary hemoglobinopathy, porphyria, leads to a buildup of porphyrins in the body and has been described in cattle, cats, and pigs. It is most prevalent in Holstein cattle and can result in a hemolytic crisis. Affected calves fail to thrive and are photosensitive. Diagnosis is based on a finding of increased concentrations of porphyrins in bone marrow, urine, or plasma. Teeth of affected animals fluoresce under ultraviolet light.  Key Points  Hematological hallmarks of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) are hyperbilirubinemia, spherocytosis, autoagglutination, or a positive Coombs test result.  IMHA is commonly treated with supportive care, along with immunosuppression and anticoagulants.  Neonatal isoerythrolysis is an immune-mediated hemolytic disease that results from the ingestion of maternal colostrum containing antibodies against one of the neonate’s blood group antigens.  Other causes of regenerative anemias include hypophosphatemia, drugs, and toxins. Nonregenerative Anemias in Animals ByAllison Kendall, DVM, MS, DACVIM, North Carolina State University Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Jul 2024 | Modified May 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Anemia Due to Nutritional Deficiency | Anemia Due to Chronic Disease | Anemia Due to Renal Disease | Anemia Due to Primary Bone Marrow Diseases | Key Points | For More Information Nonregenerative anemias can be due to nutritional deficiencies, chronic disease, renal disease, and primary bone marrow diseases. Acute anemia is initially nonregenerative, until regeneration occurs in 3–4 days; if there's no evidence of regeneration in that time frame, it is classified as nonregenerative.  Anemia Due to Nutritional Deficiency in Animals Nutritional deficiency anemias develop when micronutrients needed for RBC formation are not present in adequate amounts. Anemia develops gradually and can initially be regenerative; ultimately, however, it becomes nonregenerative. Starvation leads to anemia because of a combination of vitamin and mineral deficiencies, as well as a negative energy and protein balance.  Deficiencies most likely to cause anemia include the following:  cobalamin (vitamin B12)  copper  iron  niacin  pyridoxine (vitamin B6)  riboflavin  vitamin C (important only in primates and guinea pigs)  vitamin E  Iron deficiency is the most common deficiency in dogs and piglets; it occurs less commonly in horses, cats, and ruminants. Iron deficiency is rarely nutritional in origin; it most commonly occurs secondary to chronic blood loss. Young animals have minimal iron stores, and milk contains very little iron. These factors can be especially important for piglets, which grow rapidly and are often raised indoors with no access to iron. Oral or injectable iron supplementation is indicated as a treatment for iron deficiency, and any source of blood loss must be corrected.  Copper is necessary for the metabolism of iron. Copper deficiency can develop in ruminants fed forage grown in copper-deficient soil, and it can occur secondary to high dietary molybdenum or sulfate in cattle and in pigs fed whey diets. Low blood copper concentrations or low copper concentrations in liver biopsies (more definitive) are diagnostic. Treatment is oral or injectable copper supplementation.  B vitamin deficiencies are rare. Because intestinal malabsorption can contribute to deficiency, measurement of serum cobalamin (vitamin B12) and folate concentrations is recommended for dogs or cats with chronic GI signs.  Certain drugs (eg, anticonvulsants or drugs that interfere with folate metabolism) have been associated with development of folate or cobalamin deficiency, leading to a normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia.  Cobalamin malabsorption independent of underlying GI disease has been reported in Giant Schnauzers, Beagles, Border Collies, and Australian Shepherds (their enterocytes are unable to absorb cobalamin). These dogs respond to parenteral supplementation with cobalamin.  Ruminants develop a secondary cobalamin deficiency when grazing on cobalt-deficient pasture. Treatment with oral cobalt or parenteral cobalamin is indicated.  Anemia Due to Chronic Disease in Animals Anemia resulting from chronic disease can be characterized as mild to moderate, nonregenerative, normochromic, and normocytic. It is the most common form of mild anemia in animals. The anemia can be secondary to chronic inflammation or infection, neoplasia, liver disease, hyperadrenocorticism or hypoadrenocorticism, or hypothyroidism.  Anemia due to chronic disease is mediated by cytokines produced by inflammatory cells, which lead to decreases in iron availability, RBC survival, and the marrow’s ability to regenerate. Treatment should be directed at the underlying disease and often results in resolution of the anemia.  Anemia Due to Renal Disease in Animals Chronic kidney disease is a common cause of nonregenerative anemia in animals. Erythropoietin is normally produced by the peritubular endothelial cells in the renal cortex. Animals with renal disease produce less erythropoietin, leading to anemia.  Anemia associated with renal disease should be treated, because it can worsen the renal disease clinical signs and the patient's quality of life and can cause the progression of chronic kidney disease.  Erythropoiesis-stimulating agents can be used to treat anemia that is due to renal disease. Compared with recombinant human erythropoietin (epoetin alfa), darbepoetin is hyperglycosylated and, anecdotally, associated with a lower risk of subsequent red cell aplasia. The recommended starting dose is 1 mcg/kg, SC, once weekly in cats, and 0.5–1 mcg/kg, SC, once weekly in dogs. PCV is monitored weekly until the desired improvement is reached (the duration of treatment varies with the initial extent of the anemia), after which the dose interval is increased and PCV continues to be monitored.  Potential adverse effects of darbepoetin include pure red cell aplasia and hypertension; therefore, it is important to monitor PCV and blood pressure. Patients administered darbepoetin or recombinant human erythropoietin require supplemental iron to support RBC production. (Also see Hematinics.)  Molidustat oral suspension has received conditional approval for managing chronic kidney disease–associated anemia in cats. The conditional approval requires that the drug be administered to cats only at 5 mg/kg every 24 hours for 28 days, followed by a required pause of ≥ 7 days. PCV should be monitored during this pause, and when it decreases to < 28%, molidustat oral suspension can be administered for another 28 days followed by the required pause. Vomiting is the most common adverse effect of the drug.   Anemia Due to Primary Bone Marrow Diseases in Animals Primary bone marrow disease or failure from any cause can lead to nonregenerative anemia and pancytopenia. With diffuse marrow involvement, granulocytes are affected first, followed by platelets and finally RBCs.  Aplastic Anemia Aplastic anemia has been reported in dogs, cats, ruminants, horses, and pigs with pancytopenia and a hypoplastic marrow, replaced by fat. Most cases are idiopathic; reported causes include infection (eg, feline leukemia virus disease, ehrlichiosis, parvovirus infection), drug treatment (eg, methimazole, chemotherapeutic agents, antimicrobials [trimethoprim-sulfa, chloramphenicol], fenbendazole), toxin ingestion (eg, estrogen), and total body irradiation (see the tables Toxic Causes of Anemia and Infectious Causes of Anemia.  Aplastic anemia can also have an immune-mediated component, which is more common in dogs than in cats.  Diagnosis of aplastic anemia is confirmed by bone marrow aspiration and biopsy.  Treatment consists of eliminating the underlying cause and providing supportive care such as broad-spectrum antimicrobials and transfusions. Immunosuppressive agents such as prednisone or prednisolone, cyclosporine, mycophenolate, or azathioprine can be considered.  Recombinant human erythropoietin and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (5 mcg/kg, SC, every 24 hours) can be administered until the marrow recovers. If the disease is idiopathic or if marrow recovery is unlikely (eg, as with phenylbutazone toxicosis in dogs), bone marrow transplantation is beneficial if a suitable donor is available.  Pure Red Cell Aplasia In pure red cell aplasia, only the erythroid line is affected. Pure red cell aplasia is characterized by a nonregenerative anemia with severe depletion of RBC precursors in the bone marrow.  Pure red cell aplasia has been reported in dogs and cats and can be primary or secondary. Primary cases are most commonly immune mediated and can respond to immunosuppressive therapy. Supportive care, including transfusion, can be indicated when the anemia is severe.  Cats with feline leukemia virus infection can have pure red cell aplasia. Recombinant human erythropoietin has been reported to cause pure red cell aplasia in dogs and horses. Discontinuation of treatment can eventually lead to RBC recovery in some animals.  Primary Leukemias Primary leukemias are uncommon to rare in domestic species; however, they have been reported in dogs, cats, cattle, goats, sheep, pigs, and horses. Retroviruses are a cause in some cattle, cats, primates, and chickens.  Leukemias can develop in myeloid or lymphoid cell lines and are further classified as acute or chronic. Most affected animals have nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia, and thrombocytopenia, with circulating blast cells usually present.  Acute leukemias, characterized by infiltration of the marrow with blasts, generally respond poorly to chemotherapy. In patients that do respond, remission times are usually short. In acute lymphoblastic leukemia in dogs, the response rate to chemotherapy is approximately 30%, with a median survival time of 4 months. Acute myeloblastic leukemias are less common and even less responsive to treatment than acute lymphoblastic leukemia. In acute leukemias, the cell lineage is often difficult to identify morphologically, so cytochemical stains or immunological evaluation of cell-surface markers can be necessary for definitive diagnosis.  Chronic leukemias, characterized by an overproduction of one hematopoietic cell line, are less likely to cause anemia and more responsive to treatment.  Myelodysplasia Myelodysplasia (myelodysplastic syndrome, MDS) is considered a preleukemic syndrome characterized by ineffective hematopoiesis, resulting in a nonregenerative anemia or other cytopenias. MDS has been described in dogs, cats, and humans.  MDS can be primary or secondary and is common in cats with feline leukemia virus infection. Primary syndromes probably arise from mutations in stem cells. Secondary syndromes result from other neoplasia or drug treatment.  Some cats and dogs respond to treatment of MDS with recombinant human erythropoietin and prednisone. Supportive care with transfusions can be helpful. Survival varies because MDS can progress to leukemia; many affected animals are euthanized or die of sepsis, bleeding, or anemia.  Myelofibrosis Myelofibrosis causes bone marrow failure secondary to replacement of normal marrow elements with fibrous tissue. The disorder has been reported in dogs, cats, humans, and goats.  Myelofibrosis can be a primary disorder or secondary to malignancies, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, whole body irradiation, and congenital anemias (eg, pyruvate kinase deficiency). Diagnosis can be based on bone marrow biopsy.  Treatment of myelofibrosis varies with the underlying cause but usually consists of immunosuppressive therapy.  Bone Marrow Aspiration and Biopsy Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are techniques used to evaluate the bone marrow in domestic animal species. The basic technique is to introduce a hollow needle into the bone to obtain a marrow sample for evaluation. Aspiration provides a sample for cytological evaluation; biopsy provides a sample for histological evaluation. The equipment for these procedures can differ slightly.  The following are indications for bone marrow evaluation:  nonregenerative anemia  thrombocytopenia  leukopenia  bicytopenia  pancytopenia  abnormal circulating cells of any type  monoclonal gammopathy  suspected osteomyelitis  suspected bone neoplasia  infectious disease affecting the bone  clinical staging of neoplastic processes such as lymphoma and mast cell disease  The conventional anatomical sites for bone marrow aspiration include the iliac crest, the trochanteric fossa of the femur, the tibial crest, and the greater tubercle of the humerus. Some clinicians have also used the rib (costochondral junction) or sternebrae. The humerus is the most common site for bone marrow biopsy.  Aspiration Procedure Cats and dogs generally require heavy sedation for bone marrow aspiration; some cats can require general anesthesia. The procedure is as follows:  The patient is placed in one of two positions:  Lateral recumbency for the trochanteric fossa or greater tubercle  Sternal recumbency for the iliac crest  The area to be accessed is shaved and aseptically prepared.  The site, including the periosteum, is infiltrated with local anesthetic.  A scalpel with a No. 11 blade is used to make a stab incision through the skin.  An aspiration needle is inserted into the bone through the incision.  Most bone marrow aspiration needles (eg, Rosenthal, Illinois) are very similar and have a removable stylet. With the stylet in place, the needle is advanced with a back-and-forth screwing motion until the needle is well seated in the bone.  The stylet is removed from the needle, and a 6- to 12-mL syringe is attached for aspiration. This step is the most likely one to cause the patient some discomfort.  A small sample is drawn into the syringe (only enough to fill the hub is required).  The needle is removed.  The sample is put onto slides for cytological evaluation.  Biopsy Procedure Bone marrow biopsy requires general anesthesia. The procedure is similar to that for bone marrow aspiration (see above), except that it requires a Jamshidi needle, which is rigid and hollow with a stylet. The Jamshidi needle has a cutting edge at its end, designed to obtain a core marrow sample (it can also be used to obtain a bone marrow aspirate). Once the needle is well seated in the bone, the cap is unscrewed and the stylet removed.  An aspirate can be obtained as described above. To obtain a core sample for histological evaluation, the needle is advanced further (by approximately 0.6 cm, or a quarter inch) into the marrow while twisting in one direction. The needle is then moved in a wide, circular motion to try to dislodge a core sample.  The needle is removed by twisting in the opposite direction in which it was advanced. A blunt stylet is then passed retrograde to remove the core sample.  The core can be gently rolled onto a slide for cytology and then placed into formalin for histological examination.  Key Points  Nonregenerative anemia may be due to nutritional deficiency, chronic disease, renal disease, or bone marrow disease.  Bone marrow aspiration is a safe procedure that is most commonly indicated for diagnosing peripheral blood abnormalities.  Bone marrow aspiration enables cytological evaluation of cell morphology and cell lines.  Bone marrow biopsy enables histological evaluation of architecture. Blood Groups in Dogs and Cats ByShauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM-SAIM, University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2024 View the Pet Owner Version Canine Blood Groups | Feline Blood Groups | For More Information A blood type, or blood group, is based on the inherited antigens on an RBC surface:  The major blood group antigens on canine erythrocytes are classified as dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA).  Blood group antigens in cats are classified according to the AB system.  Other blood groups have been recognized outside of the DEA and AB systems.  Exposure to foreign erythrocyte antigens (eg, via blood transfusion) can induce alloantibodies against these antigens in dogs and cats. Cats can have strong naturally occurring alloantibodies (NOAbs) against nonself blood types.    Canine Blood Groups Recognized DEA blood groups include DEA 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, and 8. DEA 1 is considered the most clinically relevant blood type in dogs. Historically, DEA 1 was subtyped into DEA 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3; however, quantitative differences in DEA 1 antigenic expression explain these subtypes. DEA 1 is now described as negative, weak positive, and 2+ to 4+ positive. Depending on geographic area, approximately 33–65% of dogs are DEA 1-positive. Anti-DEA 1 antibodies can be induced in DEA 1-negative dogs by transfusion with DEA 1-positive blood, leading to future hemolytic transfusion reactions.   Other identified canine blood groups include Dal, the Japanese D1D2 system, and Kai 1 and 2.  The Dal antigen is present on the surface of most canine erythrocytes, and therefore most dogs are considered Dal-positive. Breeds frequently negative for Dal include Doberman Pinschers, Dalmatians, and Shih Tzu, as well as Lhasa Apsos and Bichons Frises to a lesser extent. Exposure of Dal-negative dogs to Dal-positive erythrocytes leads to sensitization and hemolytic transfusion reactions upon repeated exposure.    Feline Blood Groups The AB blood group is the predominant feline blood grouping system.  Cats are most commonly positive for type A, although prevalence of type B varies geographically and by breed. Rarely, cats are positive for A and B antigens (type AB). The A antigen is inherited as a simple autosomal trait with A being dominant over B. The mode of inheritance for type AB is not known.   The common erythrocyte antigen Mik was previously identified on the erythrocyte surface of most cats. Mik-negative cats can have NOAbs against Mik. In 2021, 5 novel feline erythrocyte antigen (FEA) blood groups were identified (designated FEA 1–5). NOAbs to these antigens can be present in cats that do not express the corresponding antigens.  Typing reagents for Mik are no longer available; however, FEA 1 might correspond to the previously identified Mik antigen. Blood Typing in Dogs and Cats ByShauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM-SAIM, University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2024 View the Pet Owner Version Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (2) Tables (0) Videos (0) Blood type testing is performed to help decrease the risk of immunological transfusion reactions in dogs and cats. Testing can also be performed in breeding cats to decrease the risk of neonatal isoerythrolysis.   Card-based blood typing, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Shauna Blois.  Immunochromatographic blood typing, cat   Image Courtesy of Dr. Shauna Blois.  Plasma or serum from an individual with known alloantibodies can be used for slide or tube typing. Commercial antibodies can be used at reference laboratories for typing. Commercially available point-of-care typing options exist and have good agreement with laboratory methods.  Card-based typing is available for dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1, 4, and 5, as well as Dal antigen of dogs, and for AB typing of cats. Lyophilized monoclonal antibody in the card wells causes agglutination to indicate a positive blood type result for a patient (see card-based typing image).  Immunochromatographic membrane test kits contain a membrane embedded with the relevant monoclonal antibody and are used in dogs for detection of DEA 1, including weak DEA 1 expression, and in cats for detection of AB (see immunochromatographic typing image).  For More Information Cornell University College of Veterinary Medicine. Blood types. eClinPath. 2024.  Also see pet owner content regarding blood groups and blood transfusions in dogs and cats. Crossmatching in Dogs and Cats ByShauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM-SAIM, University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2024 View the Pet Owner Version Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (1) Tables (0) Videos (0) Crossmatching helps identify immunological (antigen-antibody) incompatibilities between a donor and a recipient:  The major crossmatch test combines the donor's erythrocytes with the recipient's plasma (or serum) to assess for the presence of recipient alloantibodies that will destroy the donor's RBCs.  The minor crossmatch test combines the donor's plasma (or serum) with the recipient's RBCs, assessing for the risk of transfusing alloantibodies from the donor that will destroy the recipient's RBCs.  Crossmatching can be performed in reference laboratories or in clinics manually using a tube or slide method. Point-of-care gel and immunochromatographic commercial crossmatch options are also available and have variable reported agreement with laboratory methods.  Incompatible donor-recipient pairings result in agglutination and entrapment of RBCs within the gel matrix or on the immunochromatographic membrane, signifying a positive (incompatible) reaction (see gel crossmatch test image).  Gel crossmatch test, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Shauna Blois.  Crossmatching is not required before a first transfusion in a dog, due to the lack of naturally occurring alloantibodies (NOAbs), but is strongly recommended > 4 days after a subsequent transfusion.  Due to the presence of highly immunogenic NOAbs in cats, major crossmatching is strongly recommended both before a first transfusion in cats and then > 2 days after any subsequent transfusion.  Screening of Blood Donors and Blood Banking Considerations in Dogs and Cats ByShauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM-SAIM, University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2024 Blood donors require screening to ensure good health and negative status for geographically relevant infectious diseases that could be transmitted via blood transfusion, including vector-borne diseases in dogs and cats as well as retroviruses in cats. Infectious disease screening guidelines are available for canine and feline blood donors.   Blood is collected aseptically into blood collection bags containing anticoagulant. Blood collected from a blood donor can be left as whole blood or split into packed RBCs, plasma, and platelet components. RBC products are stored at 2–6°C for 21–42 days. Plasma is considered “fresh frozen” when stored at −20°C for up to 1 year and considered “frozen” after 1 year.  When available, component therapy is used to replace only the components of blood required to decrease risk of transfusion reaction and optimize blood resources.  Packed RBCs are used to replace RBCs, especially in cases of hemolysis or lack of RBC production where plasma is not required. Whole blood is best suited for patients with blood loss.   Assessment for transfusion triggers or clinical signs of anemia, rather than reliance on a hematocrit cutoff value, is most helpful for deciding whether an RBC transfusion is needed. Clinical signs of weakness, tachycardia, tachypnea, hypotension, or elevated lactate concentration can indicate the need for RBC transfusion in anemic patients.  Hemoglobin-based oxygen carrier solutions (eg, bovine origin) are no longer available as RBC product substitutes. Similar products might be available in the future.  Plasma transfusion is indicated for hemorrhage secondary to coagulopathy and colloid support.  Fresh frozen plasma contains all coagulation factors, von Willebrand factor, albumin, antiproteases, and immunoglobulins; frozen plasma contains most of these components, aside from the labile coagulation factors V and VIII. Cryoprecipitate is a concentrated plasma source of fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor, factor VIII complex, factor XIII, and fibronectin.  Plasma transfusion is an inefficient method for replacing albumin in hypoalbuminemic patients. Commercially available lyophilized canine albumin is a concentrated albumin product suitable for treatment of hypovolemic shock and hypoalbuminemia. Transfusion of human serum albumin has been reported in dogs previously, although risk of severe hypersensitivity reactions now contraindicates use of this product.  Platelet-rich plasma and platelet concentrate can be made when whole blood products are processed into components; dimethyl sulfoxide-cryopreserved canine platelet concentrate is commercially available. Lyophilized canine platelets have been reported in the literature as useful for transfusion but are not commercially available.  Whole blood stored at room temperature for up to 8 hours is also a source of platelets, although it is a less concentrated source than platelet products. Platelets are thought to have a relatively short lifespan (up to a few days) after transfusion and are used for uncontrolled or life-threatening hemorrhage secondary to thrombocytopenia or thrombocytopathia, or as component therapy in massive transfusions.  Blood Transfusions in Dogs and Cats ByShauna Blois, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM-SAIM, University of Guelph, Ontario Veterinary College Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2024 View the Pet Owner Version Risks of Transfusion | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (1) Tables (0) Videos (0) Blood products are administered in a dedicated IV line with an in-line blood filtration set (see blood product filter image). Only pumps approved for blood products (or gravity flow, without a pump) should be used for delivering blood transfusion.  Transfusion rate depends on patient condition, with rapid rates warranted in individuals with hemodynamic instability and slower delivery (over 4 hours) in more stable patients. Slower transfusion rates are indicated in patients with cardiac disease or renal insufficiency.  Calcium-containing fluids cannot be administered with blood products, and medications should not be administered with the blood transfusion. RBCs remain in the refrigerator until just before use, while frozen plasma products are thawed immediately before use.   Blood product filter, cat   Image Courtesy of Dr. Shauna Blois.  All blood donors and recipients should be typed for dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) 1 (dogs) or AB (cats) before transfusion to allow transfusion of type-matched RBC products. While DEA 1-positive dogs can receive DEA 1-negative RBC products without risk of incompatibility, use of DEA 1-positive blood products in DEA 1-positive recipients allows for prudent management of blood bank resources.  Dogs with DEA 1 weak positive blood type warrant special consideration in transfusion, due to the unknown immunological risk of transfusing DEA 1 strongly positive blood to a DEA 1 weak positive dog. A DEA 1 weak positive blood donor is treated as DEA 1-positive, while a DEA 1 weak positive recipient should receive DEA 1-negative blood.   The volume of RBCs transfused can be calculated based on the desired posttransfusion PCV. Patients do not require a normal PCV to achieve hemodynamic stability.  Transfusion volume (in mL) can be calculated as follows:   Packed RBC volume to transfuse = ([desired PCV – recipient's PCV]/unit PCV) × BV × BW  where BV is the recipient's total blood volume (in mL/kg) estimated as 40–60 mL/kg in cats and 80–90 mL/kg in dogs, and BW is body weight (in kg).  For coagulopathies, the recommended dose of plasma to transfuse is 10–20 mL/kg (dogs) or 6–10 mL/kg (cats).  Plasma is not efficient for treatment of hypoproteinemia, but volume of plasma (in mL) can be calculated as the following:  Volume of plasma to transfuse = ([desired TP – recipient's TP]/unit TP) × BV × BW  where TP is total protein, BV is the recipient's total blood volume (in mL/kg) estimated as 40–60 mL/kg in cats and 80–90 mL/kg in dogs, and BW is body weight (in kg).  Canine lyophilized albumin is reconstituted to various concentrations just before use depending on need. A 5% solution is recommended for normovolemic dogs. Dosing to achieve a patient albumin level of 2–2.5 g/dL is recommended; 450 mg/kg is needed to raise serum albumin by 0.5 g/dL.   Platelet-rich plasma, platelet concentrate, and cryopreserved platelet transfusions are dosed at 1 unit per 10 kg of recipient's body weight and administered within 2 hours.   If patient condition permits, many clinics use a test dose before administering an RBC transfusion, giving a small amount of blood (eg, 0.25 mL/kg for 15 minutes) and closely monitoring for clinical signs of a transfusion reaction. If no concerns are noted, the transfusion proceeds at the indicated rate.   Risks of Blood Transfusion in Dogs and Cats Transfusion recipients should be closely monitored throughout and after the transfusion. Vital signs should be assessed every 15 minutes during the first hour, hourly until cessation of the transfusion, then at 15 minutes, 1 hour, and 24 hours after the transfusion is finished. Patients should be assessed immediately if any clinical signs of a reaction are suspected. PCV can be assessed when RBC transfusion is completed to evaluate transfusion efficacy.    Fever Fever is one of the most common clinical signs of a transfusion reaction. A febrile nonhemolytic transfusion reaction (FNHTR) is defined as a body temperature > 39°C (102.2°F) and an increase in temperature of > 1°C (1.8°F), during or within 4 hours of a transfusion, with no other identified causes. An FNHTR is a mild and self-limiting reaction secondary to transfusion of leukocyte and platelet antigens, as well as proinflammatory mediators, and does not require treatment. More severe transfusion reactions can also present with fever; therefore, fever should prompt complete patient assessment.  Use of leukoreduced blood products has been associated with decreased rates of FNHTR in dogs.    Hemolysis Hemolysis can be due to nonimmunological causes (eg, damage to RBCs transfused from improper storage or administration techniques) or to immunological causes from type II hypersensitivity (antigen-antibody) reactions. The most common example of an immunological acute hemolytic transfusion reaction (AHTR) is transfusion of a blood type against which the recipient has antibodies.  Clinical signs of AHTR can range in severity from fever, tachycardia, and dyspnea to hypotension, shock, and disseminated intravascular coagulation. AHTRs are characterized by an inadequate increase in PCV after transfusion and clinical signs of hemolysis (eg, new hyperbilirubinemia or hemoglobinemia, presence of spherocytes, presence of ghost cells). Fever might be present.  In the case of an AHTR, the transfusion must be stopped and fluid resuscitation and other supportive care initiated as needed. Delayed hemolytic transfusion reactions can occur secondary to immunological incompatibilities and are often not clinically detectable other than by an accelerated decline in PCV > 24 hours after RBC transfusion.   Respiratory Distress Respiratory distress transfusion reactions are most commonly due to transfusion-associated circulatory overload (TACO).  Clinical signs of TACO include new onset of respiratory distress (eg, tachypnea, cough) during or within 24 hours after the transfusion. Radiographic signs of enlarged pulmonary venous vasculature or pulmonary parenchymal infiltrates, cardiac ultrasonogram showing enlarged left atrial to aortic ratio, or new increases in BNP (brain natriuretic peptide) concentration support a diagnosis of TACO.  TACO is treated by stopping the transfusion, judicious use of diuretics, and supportive care.  Transfusion-related acute lung injury is not commonly reported in veterinary patients.    Acute Allergic Reactions Acute allergic reactions cause a range of clinical signs during or within a few hours of a transfusion. Canine allergic reactions typically involve the skin and GI tract, with urticaria, edema, and vomiting commonly reported. Feline allergic reactions are primarily respiratory in nature and can cause dyspnea, although skin and GI signs can also occur. More severe allergic and anaphylactic reactions can cause hypotension and shock. Antihistamines are used to treat mild allergic reactions.  For clinical signs of anaphylaxis, epinephrine and other supportive care, as indicated, are administered.   Infection Transfusion-transmitted infection reactions arise after transfusion of pathogen-contaminated blood products. Clinical signs depend on the pathogen transmitted. Bacterial contamination of blood products can lead to a range of clinical signs, including vomiting, fever, and shock. Samples of the transfused product and of the recipient's blood should be cultured to investigate suspected bacterial contamination.  Xenotransfusion Transfusion of canine blood to a feline recipient (xenotransfusion) has been occasionally reported as an option for transfusing cats, especially when type B blood is not available for a type B recipient. Transfused canine RBCs have a short half-life in feline recipients, and there is risk of AHTR. Crossmatching is recommended before xenotransfusion to identify the most suitable transfusion product. Xenotransfusion is only indicated if all other compatible species-specific transfusion options are exhausted and warrants close consultation with clients regarding associated risks.  Neonatal Isoerythrolysis Type B queens have high titer, naturally occurring alloantibodies against type A erythrocytes, and their colostrum contains a high concentration of these anti-A antibodies. Type A or AB offspring born to a type B queen acquire anti-A antibodies in colostrum. In a neonate during the first 24 hours after birth, intestinal permeability is increased, and antibodies are absorbed systemically, leading to hemolysis. Consequently, during this period, type A and AB kittens should receive alternative feeding. Because intestinal permeability decreases within 24 hours of birth, kittens can return to nurse from the queen 24 hours after birth. Genotyping can identify B/B breeding pairs to prevent neonatal isoerythrolysis.   Key Points Blood typing for DEA 1 is strongly recommended before transfusion in dogs; AB blood typing is essential before transfusion in cats.   Cats can have naturally occurring alloantibodies against other blood types; both cats and dogs can acquire antibodies against nonself blood types through transfusion exposure.   Major crossmatching is recommended in dogs > 4 days after any transfusion and in cats, regardless of previous transfusion history, > 2 days after prior transfusion to decrease risk of immunological incompatibility between blood donors and recipients.   For More Information Wardrop KJ, Birkenheuer A, Blais MC, et al. Update on canine and feline blood donor screening for blood-borne pathogens. J Vet Intern Med. 2016;30(1):15-35.   Wardrop KJ, Davidow EB. Laboratory testing in transfusion medicine. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract. 2023;53(1):265-278.  Davidow EB, Blois SL, Goy‐Thollot I, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) transfusion reaction small animal consensus statement (TRACS) part 1: definitions and clinical signs. J Vet Emerg Crit Car. 2021;31(2):141-166.   Davidow EB, Blois SL, Goy‐Thollot I, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) transfusion reaction small animal consensus statement (TRACS) part 2: prevention and monitoring. J Vet Emerg Crit Car. 2021;31(2):167-188.   Odunayo A, Nash KJ, Davidow EB, et al. Association of Veterinary Hematology and Transfusion Medicine (AVHTM) transfusion reaction small animal consensus statement (TRACS) part 3: diagnosis and treatment. J Vet Emerg Crit Car. 2021;31(2):189-203.   Also see pet owner content regarding blood groups and blood transfusions in dogs and cats. Anaplasmosis in Ruminants ByAlicja E. Tabor, BSc, PhD, Centre for Animal Science, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland Reviewed/Revised Mar 2022 | Modified Apr 2025 Anaplasmosis is a tickborne disease of ruminants caused by intracellular bacteria that infect red blood cells, causing fever and anemia. Diagnosis relies upon Giemsa-stained blood smears and serologic tests such as ELISA. Key treatments include tetracyclines and imidocarb; in some countries, less pathogenic species are used as live vaccines for the control of bovine anaplasmosis. Etiology and Pathogenesis | Transmission and Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment, Control, and Prevention | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (1) Tables (0) Videos (0)  Anaplasmosis traditionally refers to a disease of ruminants caused by obligate intraerythrocytic bacteria of the order Rickettsiales, family Anaplasmataceae, genus Anaplasma. Cattle, sheep, goats, buffalo, and some wild ruminants can be infected with the erythrocytic Anaplasma. Anaplasmosis occurs in tropical and subtropical regions worldwide (~40°N to 32°S), including South and Central America, the USA, southern Europe, Africa, Asia, and Australia.  The Anaplasma genus also includes A phagocytophilum (compiled from species previously known as Ehrlichia phagocytophila, E equi, and human granulocytic ehrlichiosis agent, A bovis (formerly E bovis), and A platys (formerly E platys), all of which invade blood cells other than erythrocytes of their respective mammalian hosts. Bovine anaplasmosis is of economic significance in the cattle industry. A phagocytophilum is the causative agent of equine granulocytic ehrlichiosis.  Etiology and Pathogenesis of Anaplasmosis Clinical bovine anaplasmosis is usually caused by A marginale. A centrale was isolated in South Africa from cattle with a mild disease and is often used as a vaccine to protect from A marginale infections. A ovis may cause mild to severe disease in sheep, deer, and goats and is less common than A marginale infection. A phagocytophilum has recently been reported to infect cattle; however, natural infection is rare and it does not cause clinical disease.  Transmission and Epidemiology of Anaplasmosis in Ruminants Up to 17 different tick vector species (including Dermacentor, Rhipicephalus, Ixodes, Hyalomma, and Argas) have been reported to transmit Anaplasma spp (except A centrale found naturally in South Africa from R simus ticks only). Not all of these are likely significant vectors in the field, and it has been shown that strains of A marginale also coevolve with particular tick strains. Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) spp are major vectors of A marginale in Australia and Africa, and Dermacentor spp are the main vectors in the USA. Mechanical transmission via biting dipterans occurs in some regions. Anaplasmosis may also be spread through the use of contaminated needles or dehorning or other surgical instruments.  There is a strong correlation between age of cattle and severity of disease. Calves are much more resistant to disease (although not infection) than older cattle. This resistance is not due to colostral antibody from immune dams. In endemic areas where cattle first become infected with A marginale early in life, losses due to anaplasmosis are minimal. After recovery from the acute phase of infection, cattle remain chronically infected carriers but are generally immune to further clinical disease. However, these chronically infected cattle may relapse to anaplasmosis when immunosuppressed (eg, by corticosteroids), when infected with other pathogens, or after splenectomy. Carriers serve as a reservoir for further transmission. Serious losses occur when mature cattle with no previous exposure are moved into endemic areas or under endemically unstable situations when transmission rates are insufficient to ensure that all cattle are infected before reaching the more susceptible adult age.  Clinical Findings of Anaplasmosis In animals < 1 year old, anaplasmosis is usually subclinical, in yearlings and 2-year-olds it is moderately severe, and in older cattle it is severe and often fatal. Anaplasmosis is characterized by progressive anemia due to extravascular destruction of infected and uninfected erythrocytes. The prepatent period of A marginale is directly related to the infective dose and typically ranges from 15–36 days (although it may be as long as 100 days). After the prepatent period, peracute (most severe but rare), acute, or chronic anaplasmosis may follow. Rickettsemia approximately doubles every 24 hours during the exponential growth phase. Generally, 10%–30% of erythrocytes are infected at peak rickettsemia, although this figure may be as high as 65%. RBC count, PCV, and hemoglobin values are all severely reduced. Macrocytic anemia with circulating reticulocytes may be present late in the disease.  Animals with peracute infections succumb within a few hours of the onset of clinical signs. Acutely infected animals lose condition rapidly. Milk production falls. Inappetence, loss of coordination, breathlessness when exerted, and a rapid, bounding pulse are usually evident in the late stages. The urine may be brown, but, in contrast to babesiosis, hemoglobinuria does not occur. A transient febrile response, with the body temperature rarely exceeding 106°F (41°C) occurs at about the time of peak rickettsemia. Mucous membranes appear pale and then yellow. Pregnant cows may abort. Surviving cattle convalesce over several weeks, during which hematologic parameters gradually return to normal.  Bos indicus breeds of cattle appear to possess a greater resistance to A marginale infection than B taurus breeds, but variation of resistance of individuals within breeds of both species occurs. Differences in virulence between Anaplasma strains and the level and duration of the rickettsemia also play a role in severity of clinical manifestations.  Lesions Lesions are typical of those found in animals with anemia due to erythrophagocytosis. The carcasses of cattle that die from anaplasmosis are generally markedly anemic and jaundiced. Blood is thin and watery. The spleen is characteristically enlarged and soft, with prominent follicles. The liver may be mottled and yellow-orange. The gallbladder is often distended and contains thick brown or green bile. Hepatic and mediastinal lymph nodes appear brown. There are serous effusions in body cavities, pulmonary edema, petechial hemorrhages in the epi- and endocardium, and often evidence of severe GI stasis. Widespread phagocytosis of erythrocytes is evident on microscopic examination of the reticuloendothelial organs. A significant proportion of erythrocytes are usually found to be parasitized after death due to acute infection.  Diagnosis of Anaplasmosis Diagnosis based on clinical signs, blood smears, and serologic testing  Anaplasma marginale, bovine blood smear   Image Courtesy of Ms. Sue Anderson, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  A marginale, together with the hemoprotozoa Babesia bovis and B bigemina, are the causative agents of tick fever in cattle. These three species have similar geographic distributions, except that anaplasmosis occurs in the absence of babesiosis in the USA. Microscopic examination of Giemsa-stained thin and thick blood films is critical to distinguish anaplasmosis from babesiosis and other conditions that result in anemia and jaundice, such as leptospirosis and theileriosis. Blood in anticoagulant should also be obtained for hematologic testing. In Giemsa-stained thin blood films, Anaplasma spp appear as dense, homogeneously staining blue-purple inclusions 0.3–1 mcm in diameter. A marginale inclusions are usually located toward the margin of the infected erythrocyte, whereas A centrale inclusion bodies are located more centrally.  Inclusion bodies contain 1–8 initial bodies 0.3–0.4 mcm in diameter, which are the individual rickettsiae. The percentage of infected erythrocytes varies with the stage and severity of disease; maximum rickettsemias in excess of 50% can occur with A marginale. Microscopically, the infection becomes visible 2–6 weeks after transmission. During the course of infection, the rickettsemia can double each day for up to 10 days and then decreases. Severe anemia can persist for weeks after parasites cannot be detected in blood smears.  Chronically infected carriers may be identified with a fair degree of accuracy by serologic testing using the msp5 ELISA, complement fixation, or card agglutination tests. Nucleic acid-based detection methods are not always useful because these tests may not detect carrier levels.  At necropsy, thin blood films of liver, kidney, spleen, lungs, and peripheral blood should be prepared for microscopic examination.  Treatment, Control, and Prevention of Anaplasmosis Tetracyclines, imidocarb, and vaccination by inoculation with less pathogenic species  Tetracycline antibiotics and imidocarb are currently used for treatment. Infections may be completely cleared by treatment with these drugs and the cattle then remain immune to severe anaplasmosis for at least 8 months.  Prompt administration of tetracycline drugs (tetracycline, chlortetracycline, oxytetracycline, rolitetracycline, doxycycline, minocycline) in the early stages of acute disease (eg, PCV >15%) usually ensures survival. A commonly used treatment consists of a single IM injection of long-acting oxytetracycline at a dosage of 20 mg/kg. Blood transfusion to partially restore the PCV greatly improves the survival rate of more severely affected cattle. The carrier state may be eliminated by administration of a long-acting oxytetracycline preparation (20 mg/kg, IM, at least two injections with a 1-week interval). Withholding periods for tetracyclines apply in most countries. Injection into the neck muscle rather than the rump is preferred.  Imidocarb is also highly efficacious against A marginale as a single injection (as the dihydrochloride salt at 1.5 mg/kg, SC, or as imidocarb dipropionate at 3 mg/kg, SC). Elimination of the carrier state requires the use of higher repeated doses of imidocarb (eg, 5 mg/kg, IM or SC, two injections of the dihydrochloride salt 2 weeks apart). Imidocarb is a suspected carcinogen with long withholding periods and is not approved for use in the USA or Europe.  In South Africa, Australia, Israel, and South America, infection with live A centrale (originating from South Africa) has been used as a vaccine to provide cattle with partial protection against the disease caused by A marginale. In the USA, where live vaccines cannot be used, vaccines comprising nonliving A marginale purified from infected bovine erythrocytes and adjuvant have been used in the past but are no longer available. Long-lasting immunity against A marginale is conferred by preimmunization with live rickettsia, combined with the use of chemotherapy to control severe reactions. .Subunit vaccines to control bovine anaplasmosis are under investigation. In some areas, sustained stringent control or elimination of the arthropod vectors may be a viable control strategy; however, in other areas immunization is recommended.  Key Points Bovine anaplasmosis is endemic in many areas of the world and is transmitted by several tick vectors.  Certain countries use the less pathogenic Anaplasma centrale as a live vaccine, but it has not been used in North America.  Clinical signs include progressive anemia and fever with disease severity age-dependent, because cattle < 1 year old show no or mild clinical signs. Laboratory diagnosis is usually confirmed using stained blood smears and ELISA.  Outbreaks of bovine anaplasmosis are usually seasonal, and tetracyclines and imidocarb are effective treatments.  A ovis causes mild to severe disease in sheep, goats, and deer but is not infectious for cattle. Dogs and Cats Babesia spp have been reported in dogs from most geographic areas. These include B canis, B vogeli, and B rossi. Babesia canis is transmitted by Dermacentor reticularis in Europe, B vogeli by Rhipicephalus sanguineus in tropical and subtropical countries, and B rossi by Haemaphysalis elliptica in South Africa. Consequences of Babesia infection vary from a mild, transient illness to acute disease that rapidly results in death.  Babesia gibsoni is the other important Babesia of dogs and is a much smaller parasite. It has a more limited distribution and characteristically causes a chronic disease with progressive, severe anemia that is not readily treated with normal babesiacides.  Illness of varying severity due to B felis in domestic cats has mostly been reported in southern Africa, as well as B leo, and B lengau and less-well defined species. Sporadic cases associated with other Babesia species have been reported elsewhere. An unusual feature of B felis is its lack of response to the normal babesiacides.  Transmission and Epidemiology of Babesiosis in Animals The major economic impact of babesiosis is to the cattle industry in tropical and subtropical geographic areas, and is attributed to Babesia bovis and Babesia bigemina; however, the diseases caused by different Babesia have many common features. Babesiosis is a tickborne disease and its geographic distribution is therefore determined by the distribution of tick vectors. The main vectors of B bigemina and B bovis are 1-host Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) spp ticks which are widespread in tropical and subtropical areas. Transmission occurs transovarially. Although these Babesia spp can be readily transmitted experimentally by blood inoculation, mechanical transmission by insects or during surgical procedures has no practical importance. Intrauterine infection has also been reported but is rare.  In Rhipicephalus spp ticks, the blood stages of the parasite are ingested during engorgement and undergo sexual and asexual multiplication in the replete female, infecting eggs and subsequent parasitic stages. Transmission to the host occurs when larvae (in the case of B bovis) or nymphs and adults (in the case of B bigemina) feed. The percentage of larvae infected can vary from 0%–50% or higher, depending mainly on the level of parasitemia of the host at the time the female ticks engorge. Under field conditions, the rate of tick transmission is generally higher for B bigemina than for B bovis.  In endemic areas, three features are important in determining the risk of clinical disease in cattle:  Calves have a level of immunity (related both to colostral-derived antibodies and to age-specific factors) that persists for ~6–8 months, whereas older animals without immunity are susceptible to clinical disease.  Animals that recover from Babesia infections are generally immune for the typical productive lifespan of animals raised in commercial settings.  The susceptibility of cattle breeds to ticks and Babesia infections varies (eg, Bos indicus cattle tend to be more resistant to both ticks and the effects of B bovis and B bigemina infection than Bos taurus–derived breeds).  At high levels of tick transmission, virtually all calves become infected with Babesia by 6–8 months of age, show few if any clinical signs, become immune, and retain this immunity into their adult life. This situation can be altered by a reduction in tick numbers, either natural (eg, climatic) or artificial (eg, acaricide treatment or changing breed composition of herd). Low tick numbers may mean that there is insufficient transmission of Babesia to calves to ensure all are infected. Other circumstances that can lead to clinical outbreaks include the introduction of susceptible cattle to endemic areas and the incursion of Babesia-infected ticks into previously tick-free areas.  Major epizootics occurred in cattle in the US, Australia, and South Africa in the 19th century, associated with the movement of infected cattle and the tick vector. Some countries retain tick-free quarantine zones as a means of controlling the spread of the Rhipicephalus (Boophilus) tick vector.  Bovine babesiosis is an OIE-listed disease and included on the Voluntary 2021 U.S. National Animal Health Reporting System (NAHRS) Reportable Diseases, Infections, and Infestations List.  Zoonotic Risk Cases of babesiosis in humans have been reported. The rodent parasite B microti and the cattle parasite B divergens are the most commonly implicated species in North America and Europe, respectively. However, B duncani, B venatorum, and some less well-defined species have also been implicated. The reservoir hosts and vectors of some of these species are not necessarily known. Babesiosis infections in humans are acquired via bites from infected ticks or via contaminated blood from an infected transfusion donor. Cases reported in splenectomized or otherwise immunocompromised individuals are often fatal.  Clinical Findings of Babesiosis in Animals Acute babesiosis generally runs a course of ~1 week or less. The first clinical signs are lethargy, weakness, depression, and fever (frequently ≥106°F [41°C]), which persist throughout, and these are accompanied later by inappetence, anemia, jaundice, and weight loss; hemoglobinemia and hemoglobinuria occur in the final stages. Involvement of the CNS due to adhesion of parasitized erythrocytes in brain capillaries can occur with B bovis infections. Late-term pregnant cows may abort, and temporary infertility due to transient fever may occur in bulls. Many animals recover; however, some may die if not treated.  Animals that recover from the acute disease remain infected for a number of years with B bovis or for a few months with B bigemina. No clinical signs are apparent during this carrier state.  Postmortem Lesions Postmortem lesions (particularly with B bovis) include the following:  enlarged and friable spleen  swollen liver with an enlarged gallbladder containing thick granular bile  congested, dark-colored kidneys  generalized anemia and jaundice  Most clinical cases of B bigemina have hemoglobinuria; however, this is not invariably the case with B bovis. Other organs, including the brain and heart, may show congestion or petechiae.  Diagnosis of Babesiosis in Animals Babesia bovis liver smear   Image Courtesy of State of Queensland, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  Babesia bovis, brain smear, cow   Image Courtesy of State of Queensland, Dept of Agriculture and Fisheries, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  Physical examination and history  Light microscopic evaluation of blood smears  PCR assay  Serologic testing  Clinical findings and history may provide a presumptive diagnosis of babesiosis; however, other conditions also cause similar clinical signs.  Babesia bovis, blood smear, cow   Image Courtesy of State of Queensland, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  Babesia bigemina, blood smear, cow   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Babesia bovis–infected erythrocytes   Image Courtesy of State of Queensland, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  Babesia bigemina–infected erythrocytes   Image Courtesy of State of Queensland, Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, Tick Fever Centre, Wacol, Queensland, Australia.  Examination of Giemsa-stained blood or organ smears by light microscopy is essential to confirm the diagnosis. Light microscopy is rapid and inexpensive but does require some expertise. From the live animal, blood smears should be prepared from capillaries, for example from the ear or tail tip, to improve the sensitivity of detection of B bovis, because B bovis-infected erythrocytes adhere to capillary endothelium. Smears of brain, muscle, kidney, spleen, and from a blood vessel in an extremity should be taken at postmortem examination. Note that detection of Babesia spp using light microscopy in the carrier state has poor sensitivity.  Microscopically, the species of Babesia involved can be determined morphologically; however, expertise is required, especially in B bovis infections in which few organisms may be present. Babesia bovis is generally small, with the parasites in paired form at an obtuse angle to each other and measuring ~1–1.5 × 0.5–1 mcm. B bigemina is larger (3–3.5 × 1–1.5 mcm), with paired parasites lying almost parallel or at an acute angle to each other. Single forms of both parasites are also commonly seen.  Other Diagnostic Tests Molecular methods such as PCR assays are more sensitive than light microscopy and may be useful to detect Babesia spp in the carrier state or during chronic infection. Molecular methods are also used to differentiate and characterize isolates. Because of the persistence of the organisms in the blood, detection of the organisms does not necessarily indicate that they are the cause of the current disease or are having any health impact.  Serologic tests have been described for the detection of antibodies to Babesia spp in carrier animals. The most commonly used are the indirect fluorescent antibody test and ELISA. These are not useful for diagnosis in the acute stage of illness.  Subinoculation of blood (~500 mL) into a fully susceptible animal, preferably a splenectomized calf, and subsequent monitoring of the recipient for infection may occasionally be justified to confirm infection in suspected carrier animals.  Treatment, Control, and Prevention of Babesiosis in Animals Babesiacides  Supportive treatment  Tick control  Use of resistant breeds  Vaccination  Babesiacides A variety of babesiacidal drugs have been used to treat bovine babesiosis; however, only diminazene aceturate and imidocarb dipropionate are still in common use. These drugs are not available in all endemic countries, or their use may be restricted. Manufacturers' recommendations for use should be followed. For treating cattle, diminazene is administered at 3.5 mg/kg, IM, once. For treatment, imidocarb is administered at 1.2 mg/kg, SC, once. At a dosage of 3 mg/kg, imidocarb provides protection from babesiosis for approximately 4 weeks and may also eliminate B bovis and B bigemina from carrier animals.  Supportive Treatment Supportive treatment is advisable, particularly in valuable animals, and may include the use of anti-inflammatory drugs, corticosteroids, and fluid therapy. Blood transfusions may be lifesaving in very anemic animals.  Tick Control Tick control, via acaricides or management practices, can be useful in reducing tick burdens, which can lower transmission rates. However, this can lead to naive cattle populations, with consequent risk of outbreaks of disease should tick populations increase. Chemical tick control cannot be relied upon to prevent transmission of Babesia, and outbreaks often occur after introduction of susceptible cattle to endemic areas despite acaricide use. Acaricide resistance is also an increasing problem. However, acaricidal tick control before moving animals from tick-infested areas is useful to prevent the introduction of ticks and babesiosis to tick-free areas.  Eradication of the tick vector is rarely feasible on individual premises but may work on a regional level in well-coordinated programs.  Using Resistant Breeds Bos indicus–based breeds are commonly used to minimize production losses associated with ticks and babesiosis.  Vaccination Vaccination using live attenuated strains of the Babesia parasites has been used successfully in countries such as Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Israel, South Africa, and Uruguay. The vaccine is available in either a chilled or frozen form. One vaccination produces adequate immunity for the typical productive lifespan of animals raised in commercial settings. Commercial vaccines based on recombinant antigens are not yet available.  Key Points Hemotropic Mycoplasma Infections in Animals (Hemoplasmas) ByAlicja E. Tabor, BSc, PhD, Centre for Animal Science, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland Reviewed/Revised Mar 2022 | Modified Apr 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Hemoplasmas are bacteria in the genus Mycoplasma that lack cell walls and attach to erythrocytes of target hosts, potentially causing host immune-based anemia. Many infections are asymptomatic. Diagnosis can be based on microscopy or PCR. Antibiotics and supportive care are the usual treatments. Transmission | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment and Control | Zoonotic Risk | Feline Infectious Anemia | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (4) Tables (1) Videos (0)  Hemoplasmas, or hemotropic mycoplasmas, are epierythrocytic parasites within the order Mycoplasmatales. Modern taxonomy provisionally accepts that the genus Mycoplasma now contains genera previously known as Haemobartonella and Eperythrozoon based on hemoplasmas' lack of a cell wall, use of the codon UGA to encode tryptophan, and 16S rRNA gene sequences. Those species for which full characterization based on bacterial culture is lacking are given the designation "Candidatus."  Hemoplasmas infect a wide variety of vertebrates throughout the world, including several reported to infect human beings. They have morphologic features such as rod, coccoid, and ring-shaped structures found individually or in chains on the red cell, and they stain gram-negative because of the lack of a cell wall. None of the hemoplasmas have been cultured in vitro. Hemoplasmas attach to the surface of the host's red cells and may, under certain conditions, penetrate the cell.  Several hemoplasmas are of veterinary importance ( see Table: Hemoplasmas of Veterinary Importance). In addition to varying host tropism, these organisms vary in their ability to cause clinically significant hemolytic anemia.  Table Hemoplasmas of Veterinary Importance Transmission of Hemotropic Mycoplasmas in Animals Hemoplasmas may be transmitted by transfer of infected blood (blood transfusion or use of contaminated needles, surgical instruments, or herd or flock management equipment) or via arthropod vectors such as lice, flies, ticks, and mosquitoes. Vertical transmission from mother to offspring has been reported in cats, swine, and camelids. Direct transmission, possibly associated with fighting, is suspected in cats and supported by studies reporting presence of hemoplasma DNA in saliva, on gingiva, and on claw beds of infected cats.  Clinical Findings of Hemotropic Mycoplasmas in Animals Hemoplasmas can cause hemolytic anemia, but the severity varies greatly. Most animals develop asymptomatic infections, with more severe, acute anemias associated with certain hemoplasma strains, splenectomy, immunocompromise, concurrent infection (such as with feline leukemia virus or feline immunodeficiency virus in cats), or coinfection with multiple hemoplasma species. Notably, M haemofelis causes acute, potentially severe or fatal hemolytic anemia in healthy cats. Typical clinical signs include lethargy, anorexia, and fever, with splenomegaly and icterus occurring less often.  M haemocanis causes acute hemolysis in dogs that are splenectomized, but infections are usually asymptomatic in healthy dogs.  M suis causes hemolytic anemia accompanied by icterus in neonatal pigs, feeder pigs, and pregnant sows. Chronic infection is associated with poor growth rates, decreased conception rates, reproductive failure, and decreased milk production.  M wenyonii infection in cattle is usually asymptomatic, but a syndrome of mammary gland and hindlimb edema, decreased milk production, fever, and lymphadenopathy has been described in young, nonanemic, primiparous heifers. Infection in young bulls has been reported to cause scrotal and hindlimb edema.  M ovis infection in sheep and goats is often asymptomatic, but hemolytic anemia can occur in young animals, especially those with heavy intestinal worm burdens. Chronic infection may result in poor weight gain, exercise intolerance, decreased wool production, and mild anemia.  Hemoplasma infection in camelids can cause a severe hemolytic anemia in young crias.  The prevalence of chronic infection in sheep, pigs, and kennel-raised dogs is high, and outbreaks of acute disease have been reported in animals during research studies. Presence of hemoplasma infection may affect experimental results and lead to misinterpretation of data.  The hemolysis caused by hemoplasma infections is immune-mediated and typically extravascular, resulting in a regenerative anemia. Erythrocyte agglutination may be present, and Coombs’ test results are often positive in cats infected with M haemofelis. Splenectomized dogs with acute hemolysis due to M haemocanis may have agglutination, spherocytosis, and a positive Coombs’ test. Hypoglycemia secondary to glucose consumption by the bacteria has been reported in heavily parasitized pigs, sheep, llamas, and calves; however, rapid bacterial glycolysis in vitro may also cause artifactually decreased blood glucose concentrations.  Diagnosis of Hemotropic Mycoplasmas in Animals Microscopy or PCR  Historically, diagnosis of hemoplasmas has been made based on detection of organisms on routine Wright-stained blood smears, on which they appear as small (0.5–3 mcm), basophilic, round, rod, or ring-shaped structures present on erythrocytes individually or in chains, or sometimes seen free in the background. However, sensitivity of the blood smear may be poor, because parasitemia in chronic infections can be cyclic, and organisms can disappear from circulation in as little as 2 hours. Hemoplasmas dissociate from erythrocytes and die after a variable amount of time in EDTA, hampering detection of organisms in aged samples. Specificity of the test is also poor if there are few organisms and if characteristic morphology isn't present to differentiate from stain artifact or other nonpathogenic structures.  Mycoplasma haemocanis infection, canine blood smear   Image Courtesy of Dr. Robin Allison.  "Candidatus Mycoplasma haemolamae" infection, blood smear, c...   Image Courtesy of Dr. Robin Allison.  Mycoplasma (Eperythrozoon) suis, porcine blood smear   Image Courtesy of Dr. Bruce Lawhorn.  PCR assays capable of discriminating among hemoplasmas have greatly enhanced diagnosis of these parasites and has led to identification of several new Mycoplasma species. PCR can be run on whole blood and aspirates of the spleen.  Treatment and Control of Hemotropic Mycoplasmas in Animals Antimicrobial and supportive treatment  For acute hemoplasma infections, tetracyclines (doxycycline, oxytetracycline) are the mainstay of treatment; pradofloxacin and marbofloxacin have also been effective against M haemofelis. Glucocorticoids may be useful to decrease erythrophagocytosis in cases of severe hemolysis because the primary mechanism of damage is immune-mediated targeting of infected host cells. Some animals may require blood transfusion, but animals must be carefully monitored because the parasite can rapidly infect transfused cells as well. Treated animals may remain carriers and may experience periodic clinical relapses with reemerging parasitemia if the animal is stressed or immunocompromised.  Once an initial infection is controlled, either naturally or after antibiotic treatment, protective immunity develops against repeat M haemofelis infection; how long this immunity will last and whether this applies to other hemoplasma infections is unknown.  Blood donors should be screened using PCR-based DNA assays to prevent transmission to transfusion recipients. Iatrogenic transmission can be avoided by using properly sterilized needles and equipment. Control of arthropod vectors is recommended, as is minimizing stress in managing herds and flocks.  Zoonotic Risk of Hemotropic Mycoplasmas Hemoplasma infections are typically species specific, except for M ovis, which infects both sheep and goats, and "Candidatus M haemolamae," which infects both llamas and alpacas. There are reports of human eperythrozoonosis from Inner Mongolia, China, but supporting evidence is not compelling. There have also been rare reports of hemoplasma infections in immunocompromised people in which molecular methods were used for confirmation. One report documented an HIV-positive human patient coinfected with Bartonella henselae and a hemoplasma genetically similar to M haemofelis. This individual owned five cats and had multiple scratch and bite wounds. All five cats were PCR positive for Bartonella spp and two were positive for M haemofelis, suggesting the possibility of zoonotic transmission. The coinfection of a veterinarian in Texas with B henselae and M ovis also has been reported.  Feline Infectious Anemia (Hemoplasmosis) In cats, hemotropic mycoplasmosis can produce a disease called feline infectious anemia (FIA), previously known as hemobartonellosis. M haemofelis (previously the Ohio strain, or large form, of Haemobartonella felis) is the most pathogenic organism causing FIA, and it can cause hemolytic anemia in immunocompetent cats. "Candidatus M haemominutum" (previously the California strain, or small form, of H felis) is the most common hemoplasma in cat populations worldwide, but it has not been clearly associated with disease in immunocompetent cats. "Candidatus M turicensis" has never been seen on blood smears, and its pathogenicity is not well understood. Both Candidatus species may be capable of inducing anemia in cats with underlying immunosuppressive disease, such as feline leukemia virus infection.  In the case of M haemofelis infection, an incubation period of 2–30 days is followed by anemia, with some cats developing cyclical changes in PCV that coincide with the appearance of large numbers of organisms on blood smears. In untreated cats, this acute phase lasts for 3–4 weeks, after which some cats may remain chronically infected despite normal or near normal PCV values. It has been suggested that recrudescence of anemia may occur when these chronically infected cats are subject to debilitating disease, stress, or immunosuppressive therapies.  Any anemic cat, especially one with an anemia showing evidence of regeneration (polychromasia and/or reticulocytosis), may be suspected of having FIA. The severity of clinical signs correlates with the rapidity of onset of anemia. Clinical findings include weakness, pallor of the mucous membranes, tachypnea, tachycardia, and occasionally collapse. Acutely ill cats may be febrile, and moribund cats may be hypothermic. Other physical examination abnormalities may include cardiac murmurs, splenomegaly, and icterus. In chronic or slowly developing cases, there may be normal or subnormal body temperature, weakness, depression, and weight loss or emaciation.  Expected laboratory abnormalities include a moderate to marked regenerative anemia, increased numbers of nucleated RBCs, polychromasia, anisocytosis, Howell-Jolly bodies, and an increased reticulocyte count. Coombs’ tests can become positive 7–14 days after organisms appear in the blood and remain positive throughout the acute phase, reverting to negative in chronically infected carrier cats.  Haemobartonella felis, feline blood smear   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Laboratory confirmation has traditionally been based on identification of organisms in the peripheral blood using light microscopy, although M haemofelis is visible < 50% of the time in acutely infected cats. PCR assays are available in many laboratories and are considerably more sensitive and specific than blood-smear evaluation.  Without treatment, one third of acutely ill cats may die. Treatment involves supportive therapies, such as oxygen and blood transfusions, as well as specific therapy with doxycycline (10 mg/kg/day, PO, for a minimum of 2 weeks). Because of the potential for esophagitis and esophageal strictures, administration of doxycycline hyclate preparations should be followed by administration of a bolus of several milliliters of water. Either marbofloxacin or pradofloxacin is a suitable alternative to doxycycline. Treatment of PCR-positive, healthy cats is currently not recommended, because no regimen has yet been identified that completely eliminates the organism. Immunosuppressive dosages of glucocorticoids to suppress immune-mediated RBC injury may be used in cats that do not respond to antimicrobial therapy alone, or when primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia is a possible cause.  Key Points Hemoplasmas are bacteria in the genus Mycoplasma that infect RBCs of several species of animals.  Infection is often asymptomatic but can be diagnosed by microscopy or PCR.  Treatments include antibiotics and supportive care. Old World Hepatozoonosis and American Canine Hepatozoonosis ByAlicja E. Tabor, BSc, PhD, Centre for Animal Science, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland Reviewed/Revised Mar 2022 | Modified Apr 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Disease associated with Hepatozoon canis infection, or Old World Hepatozoonosis, ranges from subclinical and chronic to severe and life-threatening. Clinical signs include fever, lethargy, anorexia, and anemia. H americanum is the causative agent of American canine hepatozoonosis (ACH), a condition which is most commonly severe to fatal, with salient clinical features including fever, mucopurulent ocular discharge, muscle atrophy, muscle and bone pain, lameness, and recumbency. H canis is typically diagnosed by observation of parasites within leukocytes or by PCR. Infections are most commonly treated with imidocarb dipropionate for 2–3 months. ACH infections may be diagnosed by clinical signs, PCR, observation of parasites or associated lesions in muscle biopsies, and radiographs. Treatment is with antibiotics and NSAIDs for 2 weeks, followed by daily decoquinate for at least 2 years. Etiology, Epidemiology, and Transmission | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (0) Tables (1) Videos (0)  Etiology, Epidemiology, and Transmission of Hepatozoonosis in Dogs Old World hepatozoonosis is a tick-borne disease of wild and domestic canids caused by the protozoal agent Hepatozoon canis. The organism is transmitted by the brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus. In North America, Hepatozoon americanum, causative agent of American canine hepatozoonosis (ACH) is transmitted by the Gulf Coast tick, Amblyomma maculatum, rather than by the brown dog tick. H canis and H americanum, although closely related, result in clinically distinct syndromes in infected dogs, and genetic and antigenic differences between the organisms further support their classification as distinct species.  H canis is reported in many regions of the world, including Asia, Africa, the Caribbean islands, Europe, and South America. Before 2008, H canis was not thought to infect canids in North America, despite the presence of R sanguineus, but molecular evidence has since emerged that suggests otherwise. Still, ACH remains the more common and severe form of canine hepatozoonosis in the United States. American canine hepatozoonosis is an emerging disease that has primarily spread north and east from the Gulf coast of Texas, where it was originally detected in 1978. The distribution of this parasite chiefly parallels the distribution of the Gulf coast tick, although sporadic cases have been reported from disparate geographic locations presumably due to travel history. The associated table indicates states in which H canis, H americanum, and concomitant H canis and H americanum infections have been reported in domestic dogs.  Table States in which H canis and H americanum infections in domestic dogs have been documented The mode of transmission of hepatozoonosis is not typical in the classical sense of a tickborne disease; like other species in the genus, H canis and H americanum infections occur when infected ticks, the definitive host, are ingested by canine hosts. Sporozoites released from the mature oocysts in the ticks' hemocoel enter canine hosts via the gut. Dogs can also develop ACH after eating paratenic (transport) hosts that contain cystozoites, a resting stage of H americanum encysted within tissues.  In general, immunocompetent dogs appear to tolerate infection with H canis very well. Although life-threatening infections have been reported, clinical signs associated with H canis infection are most often subclinical to mild. H americanum, however, causes severe clinical signs in most infected dogs, with death often occurring within 1–2 years without supportive therapies; immunosuppression or concurrent disease does not appear necessary to induce the severe syndrome.  Clinical Findings of Hepatozoonosis in Dogs H canis tissue stages reside within bone marrow, lymph nodes, and spleen, and unlike ACH patients, dogs infected with the Old World parasite do not appear to be in pain at presentation; in dogs with overt disease, nonspecific clinical signs including fever, lethargy, depression, and anemia may be observed.  The tissue phases of H americanum induce pyogranulomatous inflammation, which results in clinical signs including fever, depression, weight loss, poor body condition, muscle atrophy, pain, and weakness; mucopurulent ocular discharge is common, and bloody diarrhea occurs occasionally. Fever, which may fluctuate with the waxing and waning of clinical signs, ranges from 102.7°–106°F (39.3°–41°C) and is unresponsive to antibiotics. Surprisingly, many dogs maintain a normal appetite if food is placed directly in front of them, but they often will not move to eat, apparently because of intense pain. Hyperesthesia, presumably due to severe inflammation within muscle and sometimes along bone, manifests as stiffness and reluctance to move, as well as cervical and/or truncal rigidity. Longterm sequelae include glomerulonephritis and amyloidosis.  Diagnosis of Hepatozoonosis in Dogs Clinical evaluation and patient history  CBC and biochemistry panel  Cytology  PCR  Muscle biopsy and histologic evaluation  Bone radiography  Patient history of tick exposure, travel, and, in suspected ACH cases, predation on rodents or rabbits, are important factors to consider when forming a potential diagnosis of canine hepatozoonosis, in conjunction with clinical examination and laboratory testing. The most common abnormality on blood work in dogs infected with H canis is anemia. Serum chemistry abnormalities may include increased CK and alkaline phosphatase (AP) activities as well as hypoproteinemia with polyclonal hyperglobulinemia and hypoalbuminemia. Parasitemia in dogs with clinical H canis infection is often quite high, and a diagnosis can readily be achieved by microscopic examination of Romanowsky-type stained blood films to visualize parasite-containing leukocytes or by PCR to detect parasite DNA in peripheral blood. Hepatitis, pneumonia, and glomerulonephritis associated with H canis tissue stages have been reported postmortem in some animals with extremely high parasitemia.  In dogs with ACH, the most consistent laboratory abnormality is a neutrophilic leukocytosis, with counts ranging from 20,000–200,000 cells/μL. This is typically a pronounced, mature neutrophilia, although a left shift may be present. A mild to moderate anemia is also common. The platelet count is typically normal to high. Serum chemistry abnormalities in ACH patients are similar to those occasionally observed in H canis patients. Definitive diagnosis of ACH in suspicious patients is made by finding rare gamonts in peripheral blood leukocytes, by occasional PCR detection of circulating parasite, or by identifying pathognomonic "onion skin" cysts or pyogranulomas in stained sections of biopsied muscle.  Although invasive, muscle biopsy is considered the gold standard for diagnosing ACH, because parasites and associated lesions are often extensively distributed throughout muscle tissue (especially in areas with observable atrophy); multiple or sequential biopsies may be necessary in some animals.  Radiographs in ACH patients may show periosteal reactions involving any bone, including the skull and vertebrae. The lesions resemble those of hypertrophic osteopathy except that they tend to be proximal rather than distal, and often markedly obvious in long bones; the physiologic basis for bony proliferation animals with H americanum infection is unknown.  No commercially available serologic assays have been developed to detect canine hepatozoonosis infection. PCR methods detecting circulating Hepatozoon spp are available through several academic institutions, although the assays may lack sensitivity in diagnosing H americanum infections because of the typically low levels of parasitemia in ACH patients. Use of these molecular tests has revealed that hepatazoonosis caused by H canis is more common in North America than previously known.  Treatment of Hepatozoonosis in Dogs Antiprotozoal therapy  Supportive care  Tick control products  Preventing predation  Hepatozoonosis is generally considered a lifelong infection in dogs. No known therapeutic regimen completely clears animals of the organisms. H canis infections are treated with imidocarb dipropionate, twice monthly, at 5–6 mg/kg, SC, until the parasite is no longer evident in blood smears for 2–3 consecutive months. Prognosis often depends on the degree of parasitemia; dogs with low parasitemia typically respond well to treatment, whereas those with high parasitemia may not, especially if afflicted by concurrent illness.  Remission of clinical signs associated with H americanum infection can usually be achieved through a 14-day course of combination therapy, referred to as TCP, which consists of trimethoprim-sulfadiazine (15 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours), clindamycin (10 mg/kg, PO, every 8 hours), and pyrimethamine (0.25 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours), or ponazuril (10 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours). Remission with these therapies alone is often temporary, with many dogs relapsing within 2–6 months. Decoquinate mixed in food at a dose of 10−20 mg/kg is given every 12 hours as an adjunct therapy to initial TCP or ponazuril treatment for at least 2 years to help prevent relapse. NSAIDs may be the best treatment for control of fever and pain, especially during the first few days of TCP or ponazuril therapy. Glucocorticoid administration should be avoided because, although steroids may provide temporary relief, longterm use can exacerbate disease.  Preventing access to ticks and discouraging predation are the most effective forms of control for hepatozoonosis. Predation presents a dual risk for acquiring ACH: prey captured or eaten by dogs could have infected ticks on their coats that would provide a source of sporozoites; additionally, the prey could contain cystozoites (at least in the case of H americanum) that are also infectious. Additionally, dogs diagnosed with hepatozoonosis should not be bred because transplacental transmission of H canis has been documented. Although vertical transmission of H americanum has not been reported, it may be possible.  There is no known zoonotic risk with hepatozoonosis.  Key Points Canine hepatozoonosis is caused by H canis and H americanum, which are tick-borne protozoan parasites causing distinct clinical manifestations in canine patients after infected ticks are ingested.  H canis infection often leads to mild to moderate clinical disease, with anemia in some cases, whereas H americanum infection often results in a severe clinical syndrome known as American canine hepatozoonosis (ACH), with patients commonly exhibiting fever, mucopurulent ocular discharge, intense pain, muscle atrophy, and elevated neutrophil counts.  Diagnosis of canine hepatozoonosis is often based on patient history, clinical signs, blood work and cytology, PCR of peripheral blood, and in the case of ACH, characteristic histopathologic lesions evident in biopsied muscle tissue.  H canis infections are treated with imidocarb dipropionate (5−6 mg/kg, SC) 2 times monthly for 2−3 consecutive months, whereas H americanum infections are treated with a 14-day combination antibiotic therapy (trimethoprim-sulfadiazine at 15 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours; clindamycin at 10 mg/kg, PO, every 8 hours; and pyrimethamine at 0.25 mg/kg, PO, every 24 hours) or ponazuril (10 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours) followed by long-term decoquinate administration (10−20 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours, mixed in food); tick control products are recommended to help prevent infection.  Treatment regimens recommended for canine hepatozoonosis are not curative, and prognoses are considered guarded, especially for ACH patients. Clinical signs often abate with treatment and animals return to having a good quality of life. Trypanosomiasis in Animals ByAlicja E. Tabor, BSc, PhD, Centre for Animal Science, Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation, The University of Queensland Reviewed/Revised Mar 2022 | Modified Apr 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Tsetse-transmitted Trypanosomiasis | Transmission and Epidemiology | Pathogenesis | Clinical Findings and Lesions | Diagnosis | Treatment and Control | Surra | Dourine | Chagas Disease | Transmission and Epidemiology | Pathogenesis | Clinical Findings and Lesions | Diagnosis | Treatment and Control | Nonpathogenic Trypanosomes | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (1) Tables (2) Videos (0) Tsetse-transmitted Trypanosomiasis Tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis refers to a group of diseases caused by protozoa of the genus Trypanosoma and affects all domesticated animals. The major veterinary species are T congolense, T vivax, T brucei brucei, and T simiae. T brucei rhodesiense and T brucei gambiense are zoonotic, with people as the predominant host. For the animals mainly affected by these tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes and the geographic areas where tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis occurs, see Table: Tsetse-transmitted Trypanosomes.  Table Tsetse-transmitted Trypanosomes Cattle, sheep, and goats are infected, in order of importance, by T congolense, T vivax, and T brucei brucei. In pigs, T simiae is the most important. In dogs and cats, T brucei is probably the most important. It is difficult to assign an order of importance for horses and camels. T vivax is found outside tsetse-infested areas of sub-Saharan Africa, carried mechanically by biting flies.  The trypanosomes that cause tsetse-transmitted trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness) in people, T brucei rhodesiense and T brucei gambiense, closely resemble T brucei brucei, and suitable precautions should be taken when working with such isolates. Domestic animals act as reservoirs of human infections.  Transmission and Epidemiology of Trypanosomiasis in Animals Most tsetse transmission is cyclic and begins when blood from a trypanosome-infected animal is ingested by the fly. The trypanosome alters its surface coat, multiplies in the fly, then alters its surface coat again, and becomes infective. T brucei spp migrate within the tsetse from the gut and eventually to the salivary glands; the cycle for T congolense stops at the hypopharynx, and the salivary glands are not invaded; the entire cycle for T vivax occurs in the proboscis. Therefore, the location within the tsetse can be useful in identifying the parasite species. The animal-infective form in the tsetse salivary gland is referred to as the metacyclic form. The life cycle in the tsetse may be as short as 1 week with T vivax or extend to a few weeks for T brucei spp.  Tsetse flies (genus Glossina) are restricted to Africa from about latitude 15°N to 29°S. The 3 main species inhabit relatively distinct environments: G morsitans usually is found in savanna country, G palpalis prefers areas around rivers and lakes, and G fusca lives in high forest areas. All 3 species transmit trypanosomes, and all feed on various mammals.  Mechanical transmission can occur through tsetse or other biting flies. In the case of T vivax, Tabanus spp and other biting flies seem to be the primary mechanical vectors outside tsetse-endemic areas, as in Central and South America. Mechanical transmission requires only that blood containing infectious trypanosomes be transferred by bite from one animal to another.  Pathogenesis of Trypanosomiasis in Animals Infected tsetse inoculate metacyclic trypanosomes into the skin of animals, where the trypanosomes reside for a few days and cause localized inflammation (chancres). They enter the lymph and lymph nodes, then the bloodstream, where they divide rapidly by binary fission. In T congolense infection, the organisms attach to endothelial cells and localize in capillaries and small blood vessels. T brucei species and T vivax invade tissues and cause tissue damage in several organs.  The immune response is vigorous, and immune complexes cause inflammation, which contributes to fever and other signs and lesions of the disease. Antibodies against the surface-coat glycoproteins kill the trypanosomes. However, trypanosomes have a large family of genes that code for variable surface-coat glycoproteins that are switched in response to the antibody response, evading immunity. This antigenic variation results in persistence of the organism. Antigenic variation has prevented development of a protective vaccine and permits reinfections when animals are exposed to a new antigenic type.  Clinical Findings and Lesions of Trypanosomiasis in Animals The severity of trypanosomiasis varies with species and age of the animal infected and species of trypanosome involved. The incubation period is usually 1–4 weeks. The primary clinical signs are intermittent fever, anemia, and weight loss. Cattle usually have a chronic course with high mortality, especially if there is poor nutrition or other stress factors. Ruminants may gradually recover if the number of infected tsetse flies is low; however, stress results in relapse.  Necropsy findings vary and are nonspecific. In acute, fatal cases, extensive petechiation of the serosal membranes, especially in the peritoneal cavity, may occur. Also, the lymph nodes and spleen are usually swollen. In chronic cases, swollen lymph nodes, serous atrophy of fat, and anemia are seen.  Diagnosis of Trypanosomiasis in Animals Clinical evaluation  Serologic testing  Trypanosoma vivax, bovine blood smear   Image Courtesy of Dr. Corrie Brown.  A presumptive diagnosis of trypanosomiasis is based on finding an anemic animal in poor condition in an endemic area. Confirmation depends on demonstrating trypanosomes in stained blood smears or wet mounts. The most sensitive rapid method is to examine a wet mount of the buffy coat area of a PCV tube after centrifugation, looking for motile parasites. Other infections that cause anemia and weight loss, such as babesiosis, anaplasmosis, theileriosis, and haemonchosis, should be excluded by examining a stained blood smear.  Various serologic tests measure antibody to trypanosomes, but their use is more suitable for herd and area screening than for individual diagnosis. Rapid agglutination tests to detect circulating trypanosome species-specific antigens in peripheral blood are available for both individual and herd diagnosis, although their reliability remains varied. Molecular techniques for trypanosome detection and differentiation have been developed, but they are not generally available for routine field use.  Treatment and Control of Trypanosomiasis in Animals Chemotherapeutics  Reduction of tsetse fly populations  Several drugs can be used for treatment ( see Table: Drugs Commonly Used for Trypanosomiasis in Domestic Animals) of trypanosomiasis. Most have a narrow therapeutic index, which makes administration of the correct dose essential. Drug resistance occurs and should be considered in refractory cases.  Table Drugs Commonly Used for Trypanosomiasis in Domestic Animals Control of trypanosomiasis can be exercised at several levels, including eradication of tsetse flies and use of prophylactic drugs. Tsetse flies can be partially controlled by frequent spraying and dipping of animals, aerial and ground spraying of insecticides on fly-breeding areas, use of insecticide-impregnated screens and targets, bush clearing, and other habitat removal methods. The Sterile Insect Technique (SIT) has been used with success in Zanzibar and may be used in other area-wide control operations after suppression of tsetse populations by insecticides. There is renewed international interest in large-scale tsetse eradication through the Pan African Tsetse and Trypanosomiasis Eradication Campaign (PATTEC) supported by the African Union. Animals can be given drugs prophylactically in areas with a high population of trypanosome-infected tsetse. Drug resistance must be carefully monitored by frequent blood examinations for trypanosomes in treated animals.  Several breeds of cattle and water buffalo have been identified that have innate resistance to trypanosomiasis and could play a valuable role in reducing the impact of the disease in these areas. However, resistance may be lost because of poor nutrition or heavy tsetse challenge.  Control is ideally achieved by combining methods to reduce the tsetse challenge and by enhancing host resistance with prophylactic drugs.  Surra (Trypanosoma evansi Infection) Surra is usually transmitted by other biting flies that are found within and outside tsetse fly areas. It is found in North Africa, the Middle East, Asia, the Far East, and Central and South America. The distribution of T evansi in Africa extends into the tsetse areas, where differentiation from T brucei is difficult. It is essentially a disease of camels and horses, but all domestic animals are susceptible. The disease can be fatal, particularly in camels, horses, and dogs. T evansi in other animals appears to be nonpathogenic, and these animals serve as reservoirs of infection.  Transmission is primarily by biting flies, probably resulting from interrupted feedings. A few wild animals are susceptible to infection and may serve as reservoirs.  Pathogenesis, clinical findings, lesions, diagnosis, and treatment for surra are similar to those of the tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes.  Dourine Dourine is a chronic venereal disease of horses that is transmitted during coitus and caused by T equiperdum. The disease is recognized on the Mediterranean coast of Africa and in the Middle East, southern Africa, and South America; distribution is probably wider.  Signs of dourine may develop over weeks or months. Early signs include mucopurulent discharge from the urethra in stallions and from the vagina in mares, followed by gross edema of the genitalia. Later, characteristic plaques 2–10 cm in diameter appear on the skin, and the horse becomes progressively emaciated. Mortality in untreated cases is 50%–70%.  Demonstration of trypanosomes from urethral or vaginal discharges, skin plaques, or peripheral blood is difficult unless the material is centrifuged. Infected horses can be detected with the complement fixation test but only in areas where T evansi or T brucei are not found because they have common antigens. An ELISA test may become available for diagnosis.  In endemic areas, horses may be treated ( see Table: Drugs Commonly Used for Trypanosomiasis in Domestic Animals). When eradication is required, strict control of breeding and elimination of stray horses has been successful. Alternatively, infected horses may be identified using the complement fixation test; euthanasia is mandatory.  Chagas Disease (Trypanosoma cruzi Infection) Chagas disease, or American trypanosomiasis, is a zoonotic, vector-borne disease transmitted by triatomine bugs and caused by T cruzi. All mammals are considered susceptible to infection, with infection demonstrated in >100 mammalian species. Avian species are not susceptible. The disease is best recognized in dogs and people, with dogs serving as a major domestic reservoir. Domestic pigs and cats can also be infected, but their role as reservoirs for human infection is limited. Wildlife reservoirs include opossums, armadillos, raccoons, woodrats, and nonhuman primates.  Transmission and Epidemiology of Chagas Disease in Animals Chagas disease is endemic in 21 countries of South America, Central America, and Mexico, and is increasingly reported in the southern USA. Chagas was once confined to the Americas, but human and animal migration has resulted in distribution to Europe, where it is an emerging disease of Spain, Switzerland, France, Italy, Germany, and England. Seropositivity in dogs in endemic regions can vary from 5%–92%. In some areas such as Venezuela, the seropositivity of dogs is similar to that of people, whereas in other areas, such as Campeche, Mexico, seropositivity can be higher in dogs than in people.  The nocturnal and hematophagous triatomine insects of the Triatoma, Rhodnius, and Panstrongylus genera serve as vectors for T cruzi. Common names include the “kissing bug,” “assassin bug,” “cone-nosed bug,” “vinchuca,” “chinche,” and “barbeiro." There are >130 species of triatomines in the Americas, and most are considered competent vectors. Insects take an infected blood meal ingesting extracellular T cruzi trypomastigotes. These differentiate in the midgut to epimastigotes and divide. Epimastigotes travel to the hindgut, where they differentiate back into metacyclic trypomastigotes. Infective metacyclic trypomastigotes are shed in insect feces.  In insectivorous animals, including dogs, consumption of infected bugs or materials contaminated with infected triatomine feces is a major mode of transmission. Remarkably, the opossum (Didelphis species) is a unique host for T cruzi, because the parasite can complete its entire life cycle without the need for a vector. T cruzi maturation occurs in the anal odoriferous glands, and infective trypomastigotes can be shed in feces or urine and ingested. Additional methods of transmission include transplacentally or via blood transfusions and organ transplant.  Pathogenesis of Chagas Disease in Animals Once metacyclic trypomastigotes enter the bloodstream, they actively invade many cell types, exiting the parasitophorous vacuole and becoming nonflagellated amastigotes. Intracellular amastigotes divide every 15–18 hours for 5–6 days. T cruzi transforms back into trypomastigotes and lyses the cell. Released trypomastigotes invade new cells. T cruzi has a tropism for cardiac and smooth muscle but can be found in numerous other tissues.  Clinical Findings and Lesions of Chagas Disease in Animals Chagas disease is divided into acute and chronic phases, with the chronic phase further subdivided into latent and symptomatic chronic disease. Incubation ranges from 5–42 days before acute disease. Acute infections may be asymptomatic or consist of nonspecific febrile illness with a chancre at the site of parasitic entry. Dogs may also present with regional or generalized lymphadenopathy, anorexia, lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, and hepatomegaly or splenomegaly. Rarely, acute clinical myocarditis is seen. Parasitemia peaks 2–3 weeks after infection and dissipates after the first month as the organism moves to predominantly tissue-borne disease.  The latent phase can last for months to years. Chronic disease symptoms can include generalized weakness or sudden death. Symptomatic dogs commonly present with right-side congestive heart failure. This can progress to myocarditis, with arrhythmias and bilateral cardiac dilation. Histologic examination of cardiac muscle may contain unruptured pseudocysts without inflammation or contain ruptured pseudocysts with lymphocytic, monocytic, and/or neutrophilic inflammation. Death secondary to heart failure is common.  Diagnosis of Chagas Disease in Animals Direct examination of blood smear  Antibody testing  Diagnosis of Chagas disease can be made by visualization of the organism, detection of DNA, or antibody detection. Parasitemia during the acute phase allows for detection on a microscopy of a routine peripheral blood smear. Although samples can be tested for T cruzi DNA by PCR or cultured, these diagnostic tests are uncommon in the field. On Giemsa stain, T cruzi is an extracellular, C-shaped protozoan with a single flagellum.  Antibody testing is of primary importance during the chronic phase. Whole blood, plasma, or serum can be submitted. Testing methodologies include immunochromographic “dipstick,” immunofluorescent antibody, or ELISA. Notably, cross-reaction with antibodies to Leishmania species, another trypanosomatid, can occur. Because of cross-reactivity of serologic tests, testing with at least two different methodologies or antigens is recommended. Additionally, cardiac tissue in the chronic phase can be analyzed by PCR for T cruzi DNA or by immunohistochemical analysis for amastigotes.  Treatment and Control of Chagas Disease in Animals Chemotherapeutics  Vector control  Benznidazole is the drug of choice for treatment for Chagas disease, but nifurtimox can also be used. In dogs, benznidazole is administered at 5–10 mg/kg/day, PO, for 2 months. In the USA, both of these drugs lack FDA approval, and their use requires permission from the CDC as investigational protocols. Symptomatic treatment for heart failure and arrhythmias is also recommended.  No vaccine for Chagas disease is available; thus, control focuses on preventing disease transmission. Vector control methods include applying pesticides to eliminate triatomine vectors and decreasing vector attraction to dwellings at night by turning off outdoor lighting. Breeding of positive bitches is discouraged. Screening of blood donors is recommended. To avoid iatrogenic transmission, disinfection with 10% bleach or 70% ethanol is suggested for contaminated surfaces. Dead infected insects can remain a source of infective T cruzi for up to 6 days at 10°C or up to 2 months at 26°–30°C.  Nonpathogenic Trypanosomes Trypanosoma theileri or markedly similar trypanosomes have been detected in peripheral blood from cattle on every continent. Infection with similar trypanosomes also has been detected in domestic and wild buffalo and various other wild ungulates. In the few areas studied, transmission is by contamination after a cycle of development in species of tabanid flies. Although most parasitemias are subpatent, the trypanosomes may be seen in a blood smear being examined for pathogenic protozoa or in a hemocytometer chamber. Pathogenicity has never been proved experimentally.  T melophagium of sheep also has a worldwide distribution and is transmitted by the sheep ked. T theodori, reported in goats, may be a synonym for the same trypanosome. Lymphoma in Dogs (Canine Lymphoma, Lymphosarcoma in Dogs) ByTimothy M. Fan, DVM, PhD, DACVIM, Department of Veterinary Clinical Medicine, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Illinois Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Sept 2023 | Modified Apr 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Dogs with lymphoma (a cancer of malignant lymphocytes) most commonly develop nonpainful, generalized lymphadenopathy. Clinical signs such as lethargy, weight loss, and constitutional decline can occur with more advanced disease. Lymphoma can be diagnosed by means of either fine-needle aspiration with cytologic evaluation or lymph node biopsy with histologic evaluation. Molecular diagnostic techniques, including flow cytometry and PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement (PARR) assay, can also be helpful. Treatment is systemic with chemotherapy. Etiology | Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (2) Tables (1) Videos (0)  Lymphoma (malignant lymphoma or lymphosarcoma) in dogs arises from the uncontrolled and pathological clonal expansion of lymphoid cells of either B-cell or T-cell immunophenotype. Usually primary and secondary lymphoid tissues are involved, including the bone marrow, thymus, lymph nodes, and spleen.  In addition to these lymphoid-rich organs, extranodal sites that lymphoma affects include the skin, intestinal tract, liver, eye, CNS, and bone.  Etiology of Lymphoma in Dogs The underlying causes of malignant lymphoma in dogs remain incompletely characterized, and it is likely multifactorial. Potential contributing factors include infectious viruses or bacteria, environmental contamination with phenoxyacetic acid herbicides or other chemical exposures, strong magnetic fields, chromosomal abnormalities, and immune dysfunction.  Advanced genetic studies have revealed that lymphoma in dogs can be molecularly distinguished and categorized into discrete groups that correlate with biological aggressiveness.  Epidemiology of Lymphoma in Dogs Lymphoma is the most common hematopoietic neoplasm in dogs, with a reported incidence approaching 0.1% of susceptible dogs.  Lymphoma in dogs usually occurs in middle-aged to older dogs. There is no significant association with sex. Some breeds may be at increased relative risk (eg, Boxer, Rottweiler, Golden Retriever); however, any breed can be affected.  Clinical Findings of Lymphoma in Dogs In dogs, lymphoma is a heterogeneous cancer, with variable clinical signs, responses to treatment, and survival times. The heterogeneity associated with canine lymphoma is influenced in part by several tumor and host factors, including anatomical involvement, extent of disease, morphological subtype, host constitution, and immunocompetence.  The most common clinical forms of canine lymphoma are high-grade T-cell or B-cell variants, which manifest as generalized, nonpainful, peripheral lymphadenopathy in 80%–85% of cases. Less commonly, lymphoma primarily affects other organ systems, including the alimentary tract, skin, mediastinum, and other extranodal sites.  In dogs with substantial tumor burden or paraneoplastic hypercalcemia, systemic constitutional signs, including profound lethargy, weakness, fever, anorexia, and dehydration, may become severe and life-limiting.  Alimentary lymphoma accounts for < 10% of all cases of canine lymphoma. Dogs with focal intestinal lesions may exhibit clinical signs consistent with partial or complete luminal obstruction (eg, vomiting, constipation, abdominal pain). With diffuse involvement of the intestinal tract, dogs with alimentary lymphoma may show marked and debilitating GI disturbances, including anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, hypoproteinemia, and weight loss secondary to malabsorption and maldigestion.  Exclusive involvement of the cranial mediastinum characterizes only a small fraction of lymphoma cases. Typically, canine lymphoma is characterized by enlargement of the cranial mediastinal lymph nodes, thymus, or both. Mediastinal lymphoma arising from the thymus is predominantly high-grade malignant T-cell lymphoma. With advanced disease, clinical signs may include respiratory distress associated with pleural fluid accumulation, direct compression of adjacent lung lobes, or cranial vena cava syndrome.  In addition to respiratory signs, some dogs with mediastinal lymphoma may have primary polyuria with secondary polydipsia resulting from humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy, a paraneoplastic syndrome that occurs in 10%–40% of dogs with lymphoma. Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy can be confirmed by measurement of the concentrations of ionized calcium, parathyroid hormone, and parathyroid hormone–related peptide (PTHrP) in circulating blood.  Cutaneous lymphoma, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Louis-Philippe de Lorimier.  The most common extranodal form of lymphoma involves the skin (ie, cutaneous lymphoma). Lesions associated with cutaneous lymphoma (epitheliotropic and nonepitheliotropic) may appear as solitary, raised, ulcerative nodules or generalized, diffuse, scaly lesions. The peripheral lymph nodes and mucocutaneous junctions are often involved.  Clinical signs associated with lymphoma that involve other extranodal sites may include respiratory distress (lungs), renal failure (kidneys), blindness (eyes), seizures (CNS), and skeletal pain or pathological fracture (bone).  Although the most commonly diagnosed type of lymphoma in dogs is high-grade lymphoma of either B-cell or T-cell origin, low-grade (indolent) lymphoma is a molecular variant. Indolent lymphoma consists of several histopathologic subtypes, including marginal-zone, follicular, mantle-cell, and T-zone lymphomas.  Indolent lymphomas most commonly involve the spleen or lymph nodes; generally, the clinical progression is slow. Dogs with indolent lymphomas often remain subclinically affected for a prolonged time, regardless of treatment.  Lesions Commonly, peripheral and various internal lymph nodes are 3–10 times normal size (multicentric form) in canine lymphoma, and nonpainful on digital palpation. Affected nodes are initially freely movable but firm. With disease progression, however, lymph nodes can become fixed and compress surrounding normal structures, leading to discomfort or functional compromise.  Histologically, effaced lymph nodes are gray to tan in coloration, and when transected, they bulge and lose cortical-medullary demarcation. Frequently, there is hepatosplenomegaly, with either diffuse enlargement or multiple, pale nodules of variable size disseminated in the parenchyma.  In the alimentary form of canine lymphoma, any part of the GI tract or mesenteric lymph nodes may be affected.  Involvement of the bone marrow, CNS, kidney, heart, tonsils, pancreas, and eyes is possible but less common.  Diagnosis of Lymphoma in Dogs Clinical evaluation  Fine-needle aspiration with cytologic evaluation  Tissue biopsy with histologic evaluation  Molecular diagnostic techniques  On clinical examination, generalized, nonpainful lymphadenopathy should raise suspicion for multicentric lymphoma.  Fine-needle aspiration with cytologic evaluation is a highly effective and practical method for identifying pathological monomorphic populations of lymphoid cells. Cytologic diagnosis of lymphoma depends on the proportions of large (lymphoblastic), intermediate, and small (lymphocytic) lymphocytes assessed on multiple well-made, highly cellular fine-needle aspirate smears sampled from an entire lymph node or from multiple lymph nodes.  Fine-needle aspirate smear, Labrador Retriever   Image Image courtesy of Dr. Michael Rosser.  The key cytologic hallmark of most lymphomas in dogs is a cell population composed predominantly of a relatively homogeneous population of monomorphic, medium to large lymphocytes. Cytologic diagnosis of lymphoma involving small or intermediate lymphocytes can be more challenging, necessitating biopsy or molecular diagnostic testing.  Historically, histologic evaluation of tissue biopsy samples has been the gold-standard diagnostic test for morphological subtyping of canine lymphoma (diffuse versus follicular, cleaved versus noncleaved) and histologic grade (high versus low). Immunophenotyping enables further categorization of lymphomas by immunohistochemical staining into B-cell (CD79a) or T-cell (CD3) types.  Molecular diagnostic techniques may be helpful in the diagnosis of lymphoma in dogs.  Flow cytometry permits definitive diagnosis of lymphoma based on physical characteristics including size, complexity, and expression of surface markers such as CD markers (clusters of differentiation or classification determinants).  The PCR for antigen receptor rearrangement (PARR) assay enables the determination of clonality and is a sensitive method for confirming the neoplastic origin of lymphocytes and a diagnosis of lymphoma.  Staging Once a diagnosis of lymphoma has been established, clinical staging is performed to assess the extent of disease. Diagnostic imaging and assessment of bone marrow involvement may be necessary to ascertain the stage of disease. The WHO staging scheme is routinely used to stage lymphoma in dogs (see the table WHO Clinical Staging System for Lymphoma in Domestic Animals).  Table WHO Clinical Staging System for Lymphoma in Domestic Animals Treatment of Lymphoma in Dogs Systemic chemotherapy  Radiotherapy  Autologous bone marrow transplant  Given that only a small fraction of dogs achieve a cure with conventional treatment options, the primary goal for treatment is palliative.  Canine lymphoma is generally responsive to conventional systemic chemotherapy (initial response rate ≥ 90%); most dogs achieve improved quality of life and greater overall survival time. However (except in some forms of indolent lymphoma), eventual disease relapse is expected in most dogs, with disease that progressively becomes refractory to continued treatment.  In the treatment of high-grade lymphoma in dogs, the most common chemotherapeutic agents administered in combination protocols are cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin (doxorubicin), vincristine, and prednisone (ie, CHOP-based protocols; the "O" in "CHOP" comes from one trade name for vincristine). The addition of l-asparaginase is optional; often, this drug is reserved for clinically ill dogs or cases of relapse.  Other common chemotherapeutic agents with activity against naive and relapsing lymphoma include lomustine, mitoxantrone, and rabacfosadine.  With systemic multidrug chemotherapy protocols, median survival times in dogs are ~12 months for B-cell lymphoma and ~6–8 months for T-cell lymphoma.  Compared with combination protocols, single-agent chemotherapy, with the exception of doxorubicin treatment, does not typically achieve durable remission. Doxorubicin monotherapy can achieve complete remission, with a median survival time of 6–8 months, albeit with lower response rates than CHOP-based protocols achieve. Extravasation of doxorubicin can be catastrophic, and especially in dogs, cumulative cardiotoxicity results in a lifetime dose limit.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Extravasation of doxorubicin can be catastrophic, and especially in dogs, cumulative cardiotoxicity results in a lifetime dose limit.  Prednisone monotherapy can improve quality of life and can induce remission for a time (typically 1–2 months, but some dogs can have better outcomes). However, multidrug resistance can develop.  As of 2021, the FDA had conditionally approved verdinexor, a selective inhibitor of nuclear export (SINE) antineoplastic drug, for treatment of canine lymphoma. Response rates and durations appear to be lower than with available systemic multidrug chemotherapy protocols. Experience with this novel drug remains limited; however, it may provide an additional option for treatment in some dogs.  With no treatment, dogs die or are euthanized within 4–6 weeks.  Inclusion of half-body radiation therapy in conjunction with chemotherapy might improve the longterm control of canine lymphoma.  In autologous bone marrow transplants, malignant lymphoma cells are ablated with intensive chemoradiation strategies, and reinfusion of autologous bone marrow cells secondarily rescues the patient's hematopoietic system. This aggressive treatment is available at select institutions.  Despite the favorable outcomes expected in treating high-grade multicentric lymphoma, the successful management of other anatomical forms of lymphoma is often more difficult and less rewarding.  Alimentary lymphoma, if focal, can be treated effectively with surgical resection and combination chemotherapy. However, diffuse involvement of the intestinal tract, low constitutional reserve, severe malabsorption of nutrients, and loss of proteins often result in poor clinical responses and short survival times (< 3 months).  For mediastinal lymphoma, chemotherapy alone or combined with focal ionizing radiotherapy (in patients that might have appreciable pleural effusion or space-occupying complications—ie, those with associated dyspnea) can achieve favorable survival times and good quality of life.  Cutaneous lymphoma can be controlled for limited amounts of time, often < 3–6 months, by treatment with lomustine, doxorubicin, or rabacfosadine, or a combination protocol.  For indolent lymphoma, low-intensity oral chemotherapy protocols (chlorambucil and prednisone) often provide prolonged survival times (> 2 years).  In some dogs with localized and low-grade disease (eg, splenic involvement), splenectomy can be an effective treatment option without requiring adjuvant chemotherapy. (Also see Targeted Antineoplastic Agents.)  Key Points Lymphoma is the most common hematopoietic tumor affecting dogs.  Lymphoma in dogs is often diagnosed through a combination of findings on physical examination and cytologic evaluation of fine-needle aspirates of enlarged lymph nodes.  Most dogs with lymphoma respond positively to systemic chemotherapy, with improved quality of life and overall survival time.  Although most lymphomas in dogs are multicentric, large B-cell tumors, lymphoma is a heterogeneous disease, and thorough diagnostic testing and categorization can influence treatment recommendations and prognosis. Overview of Hemostatic Disorders in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Physiological Understanding of Hemostasis | Clinical Approach to Assessing Hemostasis | Key Points | For More Information | References Effective hemostasis depends on an adequate number of functional platelets, an adequate concentration and activity of plasma coagulation and fibrinolytic proteins, and a normally responsive blood vasculature. The diagnosis, treatment, and monitoring of hypo- and hypercoagulable animals is difficult with regard to both the progression of disease and the monitoring of blood component and/or anticoagulant therapy.  Citrated plasma samples are often used in veterinary medicine to determine fibrinogen concentration, activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and D-dimer or fibrinogen degradation product (FDP) concentration.  The introduction of the cell-based tissue factor (TF)/factor VII–dependent model of hemostasis has enhanced understanding of the complex biochemistry of physiological hemostasis, leading to reevaluation of the traditional cascade model of physiological hemostasis, which divides coagulation into intrinsic and extrinsic pathways.  Although citrated plasma contains many of the factors involved in coagulation, whole blood contains not only these soluble factors but also the cellular components (eg, TF and phospholipid) that participate in normal and pathological hemostasis.  Physiological Understanding of Hemostasis in Animals The traditional model of hemostasis, known as the cascade or waterfall model, divides coagulation proteins into an extrinsic and an intrinsic arm or pathway, both of which lead to a final, common pathway ending in formation of fibrin. This model offers a simplified understanding of how factors activate one another; however, it might not accurately reflect complex and overlapping interactions of procoagulant elements, especially the importance of cell surfaces.  Pearls & Pitfalls  The cascade model of hemostasis simplifies the complex and overlapping interactions of procoagulant elements but may not be as biologically accurate as the cell-based model.  The cell-based model of hemostasis has been introduced to explain hemostasis through the interaction of vascular tone, blood flow, endothelial cells, platelets, and leukocytes, as well as coagulation and fibrinolytic factors, cofactors, and inhibitors (1). These interactions, under normal circumstances, result in balanced hemostasis, ensuring that there is formation of a clot at an injured site, inhibition of clotting when not needed, and fibrinolysis of clots when appropriate.  This dynamic model involves cellular regulation of coagulation in three phases: initiation, amplification, and propagation.  Initiation: TF-bearing cells initiate hemostasis. TF (factor III) is a transmembrane glycoprotein receptor found in extravascular tissues, including organ capsules and the adventitia of blood vessel walls. It is constitutively expressed on fibroblasts, and upon cellular activation it is also expressed on vascular smooth muscle cells, monocytes, and neutrophils. The TF-bearing cells and platelet surfaces act as the main surfaces for assembly of procoagulant complexes.  Any vessel injury leads to TF exposure. Factor VII binds to TF, resulting in activation to factor VIIa. Factor VIIa that is bound to TF on the cell surface, the "extrinsic tenase complex," activates factor IX to factor IXa and factor X to factor Xa. Initially, the formed factor Xa is limited to the TF-bearing cell because factor Xa that diffuses away from the cell is rapidly inhibited by TF pathway inhibitor (TFPI) or antithrombin.  Amplification: Factors Va and Xa assemble into the "prothrombinase complex" on the surface of the TF-bearing cell. A small, priming amount of factor IIa (thrombin) is initially generated close to the cell. This small amount of thrombin is not enough to lead to clot formation; however, it amplifies clot-forming elements by activating platelets to release factor V, causing von Willebrand factor to release factor VIII, and activating factors V, VIII, and XI.  Platelets are also activated by other mechanisms, including exposure of vessel wall collagen and von Willebrand factor, leading to platelet adhesion and aggregation at the injured site. Activated platelets aggregate to form the initial platelet plug that precedes the fibrin clot.  Propagation: As an essential part of platelet activation, the procoagulant phospholipid phosphatidylserine becomes available on the exterior surface of platelets. In the propagation phase of the cell-based model, the binding of factor IXa to activated platelets promotes formation of the "intrinsic tenase complex" of factor IXa, factor VIIIa, phosphatidylserine, and calcium.  Factor IXa activated during the initiation phase by the interaction of factor VIIa and TF-bearing cells is able to diffuse to the surface of activated platelets because it is not inhibited by TFPI and is only slowly inhibited by antithrombin.  Factor IX can also be activated on the surface of platelets by factor XIa. Formation of the intrinsic tenase complex on the surface of activated platelets results in abundant factor Xa formation. As in the amplification phase, factor Xa complexes with factor Va, forming the "prothrombinase complex" on the surface of activated platelets and leading to the cleavage of factor II (prothrombin) and a major subsequent burst of factor IIa (thrombin). Thrombin cleaves factor I (fibrinogen) to factor Ia (fibrin), forming a fibrin clot.  The thrombin burst in the propagation phase activates plasmin, thereby initiating fibrinolysis, which keeps the clot controlled at the site of injury. To control fibrinolysis, the antifibrinolytic pathway is activated by thrombin activation of thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI). TAFI slows the fibrinolytic process by inhibiting plasmin activity, thereby preventing premature clot lysis and enabling clot propagation.  The balance of fibrin formation and fibrinolysis regulates the size and quality of the fibrin clot and localizes it to the injury site. The quality of the clot has a marked impact on how effectively it provides hemostasis.  Clinical Approach to Assessing Hemostasis in Animals Although the traditional division between primary, secondary, and tertiary (fibrinolysis) hemostasis is not biologically accurate, it is still a useful approach to assessing hemostasis in animals with acquired or hereditary hemostatic disorders.  Primary hemostasis is accomplished by interaction of platelets with exposed subendothelial surfaces and results in a platelet plug. Simultaneously, plasma coagulation proteins are activated in a sequential cascade that depends on the phospholipid provided by the activated platelets and on calcium ions from plasma to form a stable fibrin clot (secondary hemostasis). Circumstances that activate platelets and the coagulation proteins also activate plasma fibrinolytic proteins, which ensure localization of the clot and its timely dissolution (tertiary hemostasis).  Tests of Primary Hemostasis Tests of primary hemostasis include in-clinic tests such as platelet count and buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), as well as tests offered by reference laboratories, such as platelet closure time and von Willebrand factor (vWF) measurement.  Platelet counts can be estimated from peripheral blood smears. Platelets can be activated upon blood collection, leading to clumping and underestimated machine platelet counts, which emphasizes the importance of manual blood smear analysis. Apparent thrombocytopenia caused by in vitro platelet agglutination should not cause spontaneous bleeding.  Platelet counts can be lower than the reference range in clinically normal Greyhounds and other sight hound breeds. EDTA-induced platelet clumping occurs occasionally in dogs and horses (pseudothrombocytopenia), and cat platelets activate and clump readily during blood collection.  Buccal mucosal bleeding time is a point-of-care screening test commonly used to assess primary hemostasis in dogs. The lip is inverted, and a spring-loaded, automated lancet device produces a standardized incision on the mucosal side. Blood adjacent to the wound is gently blotted with absorbing paper every 5 seconds until bleeding stops. Canine BMBT is reported as normal (< 4 minutes) or abnormal. BMBT can also be measured in cats; however, the test is uncommonly used clinically, it usually requires sedation, and the technique and interpretation are not well standardized or documented (2).  Platelet closure time, measured by a platelet function analyzer, provides a quantitative, simple, and rapid in vitro assessment of primary platelet-related hemostasis at high shear stress. The test requires a small volume of citrated whole blood, which is drawn under vacuum through a 200-mcm-diameter stainless steel capillary and a 150-mcm-diameter aperture in a nitrocellulose membrane coated with collagen and epinephrine (CEPI) or collagen and ADP (CADP). A platelet aggregate forms that blocks blood flow through the aperture; the time taken to occlude the aperture is reported as the closure time.  Prolonged platelet closure times occur with inherited and acquired platelet function disorders, including von Willebrand disease. Platelet function analyzers also can be used to monitor response to treatment with both desmopressin acetate and glycoprotein IIb/IIIa antagonists.  Assays of canine vWF are typically required for diagnosis of von Willebrand disease and include measurement of vWF antigen concentration and collagen-binding assays for measurement of vWF activity.   Tests of Secondary Hemostasis Tests of secondary hemostasis include plasma-based assays measuring activated clotting time (ACT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), and prothrombin time (PT).  aPTT assesses factors of the intrinsic (XII, XI, IX, VIII) and common (X, V, II, I) pathways.  PT assesses factors of the extrinsic (VII) and common pathways.  Measurement of the activity of individual coagulation factors can identify additional specific factor deficits, helping to localize and define the problem in animals suspected of having hemostatic disease.  Tests of Tertiary Hemostasis The fibrinolytic system (tertiary hemostasis) is traditionally evaluated with measurements of clot breakdown products, such as FDPs and D dimers.  Endogenous anticoagulant ability has been evaluated via the measurement of antithrombin, protein C, and protein S activity.  Viscoelastic Testing Plasma-based coagulation screening tests can help identify defective or deficient coagulation proteins. Although this traditional approach makes it possible to effectively and systematically localize causes of bleeding, it can be difficult from a clinical perspective to globally evaluate clotting disturbances that affect multiple stages of hemostasis, identify hypercoagulable states, and monitor the effect of anticoagulant or procoagulant treatment.  One reason for this difficulty might be that plasma-based tests of the secondary and tertiary systems target specific elements of the hemostatic system, thus potentially ignoring other factors that could substantially contribute to overall hemostatic capability in acquired disorders. Another plausible reason is the low sensitivity of aPTT and PT; usually, activity of a coagulation protein must be < 30% and sometimes < 10% of normal before an abnormality is detected.  Viscoelastic testing, such as thromboelastography or thromboelastometry, enables rapid assessment of hemostatic function in whole blood. Because whole blood contains the soluble factors and cellular components involved in hemostasis, whole blood assays can provide a more accurate reflection of in vivo hemostasis than can traditional plasma-based hemostasis assays. These modalities evaluate all the steps of hemostasis, including initiation, amplification, and propagation, as well as fibrinolysis, which includes the interaction of platelets and leukocytes with the proteins of the coagulation cascade.  Viscoelastic testing modalities evaluate both the traditional plasma components of coagulation and the cellular components. Viscoelastic testing is performed on unstabilized fresh whole blood within minutes of taking a blood sample, and coagulation pathways are assessed after chemical activators have been added to the sample. Viscoelastic testing modalities analyze the dynamics of clot formation time, clot strength, and clot breakdown.  Viscoelastic testing is the first modality available to clinicians that can evaluate hypercoagulability. It is a valuable aid in the diagnostic evaluation of animals with abnormal hemostasis and a supplement to traditional coagulation tests such as PT, aPTT, D-dimer, and fibrinogen assays.  Point-of-care viscoelastic testing machines are becoming more widely available, and abundant emerging research seeks to translate observations from various viscoelastic testing modalities into clinically meaningful information for a variety of hyper- and hypocoagulable disorders in a variety of species.  Key Points The primary stage of hemostasis requires normal number and function of platelets and von Willebrand factor to form a plug.  In secondary hemostasis, a fibrin clot forms via TF-bearing cells, activated platelet surfaces, and clotting factors. The extent of the clot is controlled by fibrinolysis (tertiary hemostasis).  Traditional evaluation of coagulation could involve a combination of tests of primary, secondary, and tertiary stages. Viscoelastic testing enables a more global assessment of interacting hemostatic pathways.  For More Information eClinPath.com (Cornell University): Hemostasis  Veterinary Hematology, Clinical Chemistry, and Cytology. 3rd ed. Wiley-Blackwell; 2022:201-219.  Also see pet owner content regarding bleeding disorders of dogs, cats, and horses.  References Hoffman M. A cell-based model of coagulation and the role of factor VIIa. Blood Rev. 2003;17(suppl 2):S1-S5. doi:10.1016/s0268-960x(03)90000-2  Alatzas DG, Mylonakis ME, Kazakos GM, Kostoulas P, Kritsepi-Konstantinou M, Polizopoulou ZS. Reference values and repeatability of buccal mucosal bleeding time in healthy sedated cats. J Feline Med Surg. 2014;16(2):144-148. doi:10.1177/1098612X13502973    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Overview of Hemostatic Disorders in Animals Coagulation Disorders in Animals Platelet Disorders in Animals Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals Pathological Thrombosis in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Coagulation Disorders in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Bleeding diathesis can be caused by congenital or acquired defects in the vasculature, platelets, or coagulation proteins.  Congenital or acquired defects or deficiencies of platelets usually manifest as superficial petechial and ecchymotic hemorrhages (especially of mucous membranes), epistaxis, melena, or prolonged bleeding at injection and incision sites.  Congenital or acquired deficiencies of coagulation proteins usually manifest clinically as delayed or recurring deep tissue hemorrhage, hematoma formation, and bleeding into joints and body cavities. Petechiae generally do not occur in conditions caused by abnormalities in coagulation proteins.  Pathological thrombosis can result from primary or inherited disorders of anticoagulant protein factors or, more commonly, from acquired disorders. Collectively, these conditions are called hypercoagulable states.  Syndromes, such as DIC, that enhance platelet responsiveness to agonists and alter the balance between anticoagulant and procoagulant protein factors or that increase the reactivity of endothelium are always secondary to another disease or injury that must be recognized and treated for a successful outcome. DIC is more common in animals than are inherited disorders.  For More Information eClinPath.com (Cornell University): Hemostasis: Disorders  Goggs R, Blais M-C, Brainard BM, et al. American College of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care (ACVECC) Consensus on the Rational Use of Antithrombotics in Veterinary Critical Care (CURATIVE) guidelines: small animal. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2019;29(1):12-36.    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Overview of Hemostatic Disorders in Animals Coagulation Disorders in Animals Platelet Disorders in Animals Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals Pathological Thrombosis in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Platelet Disorders in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Congenital Thrombocytopenia | Acquired Thrombocytopenia | Congenital Platelet Function Disorders | Acquired Platelet Function Disorders | Key Points | For More Information | References Disorders of platelets can be divided into acquired or congenital thrombocytopenia and acquired or congenital functional disorders (thrombopathia; also thrombocytopathy or thrombopathy). Acquired thrombocytopenia is the most common.  Congenital Thrombocytopenia in Animals Hereditary Macrothrombocytopenia Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia is a benign, inherited giant platelet disorder that affects approximately 30–50% of Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. It has been identified in numerous other dog breeds as well, including Norfolk and Cairn terriers. It is characterized by thrombocytopenia with macrothrombocytes resulting from mutations in the beta-1-tubulin gene, which encodes a protein necessary for megakaryocyte division into platelets of normal size.  The disorder is suspected in dogs with persistently low platelet counts on routine CBCs, in the absence of bleeding, and it does not require intervention. Affected dogs commonly have platelet counts in the range of 50,000–100,000/mcL, or lower, depending on the accuracy of the analyzer and the condition of the sample. Hereditary macrothrombocytopenia must be differentiated from thrombocytopenia that is due to pathological causes.  Genetic testing is available and can be valuable to avoid unnecessary and potentially harmful treatment (and associated costs and worry) that may be given for pathological causes of thrombocytopenia.  Cyclic Hematopoiesis (Gray Collie Syndrome) Cyclic hematopoiesis is an autosomal recessive disorder that was originally identified in Collies and has rarely been reported in dogs of other breeds. It is also known as "gray Collie syndrome" because affected Collies have abnormal, dark pewter-gray to silver coat pigmentation (1, 2, 3).  Cyclic hematopoiesis is characterized by a mutation in the canine AP3B1 gene that results in 12-day cycles of cytopenia.  All marrow stem cells are affected; however, neutrophils are the most affected because of their short half-life (usually < 24 hours). Mild to severe thrombocytopenia can occur, and excessive bleeding is a potential complication.  Cyclic hematopoiesis is fatal; affected dogs usually die from fulminating infections before they are 6 months old. Even dogs that receive intensive antimicrobial treatment usually die by the age of 3 years, with amyloidosis secondary to chronic antigenic stimulation from recurrent infections.  Treatment with recombinant granulocyte colony-stimulating factor has been found to be successful in temporarily alleviating the neutropenic cycles until antibodies are produced against the noncanine proteins (4).  Collie breeders have successfully minimized the occurrence of cyclic hematopoiesis, and it exists now mostly in laboratory animals used for the study of hematopoiesis.  Genetic testing is available to enable early detection and subsequent monitoring in an individual animal; it could also help breeders identify carriers.  Fetal and Neonatal Alloimmune Thrombocytopenia Fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia is a rare disorder that occurs when maternal antibodies are produced against a paternal antigen on fetal platelets.  Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia has been reported in a 1-day-old Quarter Horse foal. In the reported case, indirect assays identified immunoglobulins bound to the foal’s platelets in the mare’s plasma, serum, and milk. The immunoglobulins were further shown to recognize platelets from the foal’s full brother, born 1 year earlier (5). This diagnosis should be considered for foals with severe thrombocytopenia when other causes can be excluded.  A group of lambs artificially reared and fed bovine colostrum developed subcutaneous bruising, weakness, pale mucous membranes, and severe thrombocytopenia with prolonged bleeding from puncture wounds due to ear tag placement. All affected lambs died within 48 hours of birth. The presence of antibodies directed against platelets was suspected because the cows from which colostrum was obtained had been used in a previous experiment in which they had been immunized against sheep blood (6).  Acquired Thrombocytopenia in Animals Acquired thrombocytopenia is reported frequently in dogs and cats, less often in horses, and rarely in other species. Frequently, thrombocytopenia is secondary to a broader systemic process in clinically ill animals, and artifactually low machine platelet counts are common in animals.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Spontaneous bleeding due to thrombocytopenia does not typically occur until platelet counts are lower than approximately 30,000/mcL.  Spontaneous bleeding due to thrombocytopenia does not typically occur until platelet counts are lower than approximately 30,000/mcL. Hemorrhage from trauma (eg, venipuncture, organ aspirates, surgery) does not typically occur until platelet counts are lower than approximately 50,000/mcL.  If spontaneous bleeding or surgical bleeding complications occur in the face of a platelet count above the minimum platelet count threshold, multifactorial coagulation abnormalities should be considered.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Hemorrhage from trauma does not typically occur until platelet counts are lower than approximately 50,000/mcL.  Causes of acquired thrombocytopenia can broadly result from increased platelet consumption (to stop hemorrhage or in pathological thrombosis), accelerated destruction, lack of production, or sequestration in the spleen.  Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP) is characterized by immune-mediated destruction of either circulating platelets or, less commonly, marrow megakaryocytes. It has been reported in dogs, horses, and, rarely, cats. Middle-aged female dogs, especially Cocker Spaniels, are overrepresented.  Clinical signs of ITP include petechiae of the gingivae or skin, as well as ecchymosis, melena, hematuria, ocular bleeding, and/or epistaxis. Some dogs with extremely low platelet counts remain clinically unaffected. Platelet counts are usually < 30,000/mcL and often < 10,000/mcL at the time of diagnosis.  ITP can be classified as either primary (with no identifiable trigger) or secondary to a wide variety of infections (particularly vector-borne infections), drugs, and neoplastic or inflammatory diseases. There is little evidence to support vaccination as a cause of ITP in dogs; however, it might be in rare instances.  A variety of tests have been developed to prove the presence of antiplatelet antibodies; however, none have shown dependable sensitivity and specificity.  ITP diagnosis is usually based on the exclusion of other causes of thrombocytopenia in a patient with verifiable and severe thrombocytopenia. A bone marrow aspirate can help determine whether megakaryocytes have been targeted; it is rarely needed, though, because marrow megakaryocytes are less commonly the target, and treatment and prognosis are similar whether or not megakaryocytes are decreased.  Patients with ITP should be kept at rest to avoid exacerbating bleeding tendencies.  Treatment involves immunosuppression, often initially by corticosteroid administration, starting at a high dose and then tapering (as in the treatment of hemolytic anemia). A single injection of vincristine (0.01–0.02 mg/kg, IV) at the start of treatment has been shown to shorten the time to recovery of the platelet count (7). Dogs that received prednisone and vincristine had a significantly faster increase in platelet count to > 40,000 platelets/mcL than dogs that received prednisone alone (mean +/- SD, 4.9 +/- 1.1 vs 6.8 +/- 4.5 days, respectively).  Alternative immunosuppressive drugs (eg, modified cyclosporine, mycophenolate mofetil) are sometimes used (in addition to corticosteroids) to minimize longterm reliance on corticosteroids and/or for refractory or relapsing cases.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Whole blood and platelet transfusions will not normalize platelet numbers, but they might slow ongoing platelet consumption in patients with severe, life-threatening bleeding.  Transfusion with fresh whole blood or packed RBCs should be performed in animals with clinical signs related to anemia. Whole blood and platelet transfusions will not normalize platelet numbers; however, they might help to slow the ongoing, consumptive siphon for platelets in patients with severe and life-threatening bleeding.  Therapeutic plasma exchange has been described for the treatment of ITP in dogs (8) and could be an option at referral centers offering this form of therapy. Splenectomy should be reserved as a treatment for animals that have recurrent episodes of thrombocytopenia.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Splenectomy should be considered only in animals that have recurrent or refractory thrombocytopenia.  The platelet count should be monitored while immunosuppressive medications are slowly tapered (over a period of 4–6 months or longer) because relapses can occur. Drugs that interfere with coagulation should be avoided.  Rickettsial Diseases Infections caused by Rickettsia rickettsii (the causative agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever), Anaplasma platys, Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia ewingii, or Ehrlichia canis, which are transmitted by ticks, cause mild to severe thrombocytopenia in dogs.  A platys infection usually is characterized by mild, often cyclic thrombocytopenia in the acute stages of disease. Chronic infections often involve constant mild to moderate thrombocytopenia. Morulas (single to multiple, round to oval basophilic inclusions) can sometimes be identified in platelets of infected dogs. Thrombocytopenia due to A platys is seldom severe enough to result in clinical bleeding tendencies.  E canis infections are characterized by variable alterations in total WBC, RBC, and platelet counts. Acute infections usually involve thrombocytopenia, and possibly anemia or leukopenia. Chronic infections sometimes involve thrombocytopenia or anemia; also there is often leukopenia and sometimes hyperglobulinemia (monoclonal or polyclonal).  A phagocytophilum infection has been documented in a wide variety of domestic and wild animals. It is characterized by bleeding, fever, lethargy, and a reluctance to move. Changes in blood parameters include thrombocytopenia and lymphopenia. Morulas can occur in granulocytes.  Treatment for these rickettsial infections is doxycycline. Chronic E canis infections might not respond well; however, some dogs can survive without clinical signs despite subnormal RBC, WBC, and platelet counts, especially in endemic areas.  Neoplasia In addition to other mechanisms for causing thrombocytopenia, hemangiosarcoma, lymphoma, and carcinoma can be associated with consumptive thrombocytopenia due to DIC. Immunological and inflammatory mechanisms cause increased platelet consumption and decreased platelet survival time. However, bleeding tendencies without thrombocytopenia occasionally occur. Altered platelet function due to an acquired membrane defect has been associated with hyperglobulinemia. Vasculitis also can contribute to the hemostatic disorder.  Drug-Induced Thrombocytopenia Thrombocytopenia associated with the administration of certain drugs has been reported in dogs, cats, and horses. One mechanism is marrow suppression of megakaryocytes or generalized marrow stem cell suppression (after administration of estrogen, chloramphenicol, phenylbutazone, diphenylhydantoin, phenobarbital, or sulfonamides). Another mechanism is increased platelet destruction and consumption (after administration of sulfisoxazole, aspirin, diphenylhydantoin, ristocetin, levamisole, methicillin, or penicillin).  Drug reactions are idiosyncratic and therefore unpredictable. Platelets usually return to normal shortly after the drug is discontinued. Drug-induced bone marrow suppression can be prolonged. The chemotherapy drug lomustine has sometimes caused prolonged thrombocytopenia that persists after the drug is stopped.  Other Causes of Thrombocytopenia Many infectious and inflammatory diseases can lead to vasculitis, platelet activation, and thrombocytopenia. Platelet count can be low if platelets are consumed during appropriate clotting to try to stop a hemorrhage, as in trauma or disorders of secondary hemostasis. They can also be consumed during pathological thrombosis (such as hypercoagulable states or DIC). Platelet count can be low with a variety of bone marrow disorders, including toxicoses, infections, myelofibrosis, or myelophthisis, with or without other cytopenias.  Quantitative platelet disorders have been reported in liver disease with or without coagulation protein deficiencies.  In two studies of cats with thrombocytopenia, 29–50% had infectious diseases, including feline leukemia, feline infectious peritonitis, panleukopenia, or toxoplasmosis (9, 10).  Feline leukemia virus replicates and accumulates in megakaryocytes and platelets. Aplasia or hypoplasia of marrow stem cells, immune destruction of infected platelets, or extravascular sequestration of platelets within lymphoid tissues can contribute to thrombocytopenia in cases of feline leukemia virus infection.  Intravascular parasites can also cause platelet activation and removal.  Bovine viral diarrhea virus can cause thrombocytopenia in cattle.  Platelets can be sequestered in the spleen when the spleen is congested, such as during sedation or anesthesia.  The mechanism of thrombocytopenia is not identified in many cases.  Congenital Platelet Function Disorders in Animals Congenital disorders of platelet function affect platelet adhesion, aggregation, or secretion. They can be either intrinsic or extrinsic to platelets.  Testing of intrinsic platelet function requires careful handling of samples and specialized equipment that is not routinely available in diagnostic laboratories; therefore, the incidence of intrinsic functional defects in platelets is not accurately known. However, if a coagulopathy exists (especially with petechiae or mucosal bleeding) but results of coagulation screening, platelet count, and von Willebrand factor assessment are normal, then a platelet function disorder should be suspected.  There is no specific treatment for any intrinsic platelet function disorder. In instances of severe hemorrhaging, platelet transfusion products can be administered to aid hemostasis. Whole blood or packed RBCs can be administered to patients with clinical signs of anemia.  Von Willebrand Disease Von Willebrand disease, caused by defective or deficient von Willebrand factor (vWF, formerly called factor VIII–related antigen), is the most common inherited bleeding disorder in dogs (reported in nearly all breeds and in mixed breeds). The disease has been reported also in cats, rabbits, cattle, horses, and pigs.  The disease is relatively common (10–70% prevalence) in several breeds of dogs: Doberman Pinscher, German Shepherd Dog, Golden Retriever, Miniature Schnauzer, Pembroke Welsh Corgi, Shetland Sheepdog, Basset Hound, Scottish Terrier, Standard Poodle, and Standard Manchester Terrier. Many dogs with von Willebrand disease are subclinically affected.  Canine von Willebrand disease is classified into three subtypes based on clinical severity, plasma vWF concentration, and vWF multimer composition:  Type 1, the most common form, is characterized by mild to moderate clinical signs, low vWF concentration, and a normal multimer distribution.  Type 2 is characterized by moderate to severe clinical signs, low vWF concentration, and a loss of high-molecular-weight multimers.  Type 3, which occurs most commonly in Shetland Sheepdogs and Scottish Terriers, is a severe disorder characterized by total absence of vWF.  Two modes of inheritance for von Willebrand disease are known. In the less common autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance, homozygosity is usually fatal, and heterozygosity results in subclinically affected carriers. In the more common inheritance pattern of autosomal dominance with incomplete penetrance, homozygotes and heterozygotes can have variable bleeding tendencies.  Affected animals can have gingival bleeding, epistaxis, and hematuria. Some puppies bleed excessively only after injection, venipuncture, or surgery, such as tail docking, ear cropping, or dewclaw removal.  vWF circulates as a complex with coagulation factor VIII and mediates platelet adhesion to subendothelial surfaces—the first step in clot formation. The most common clinical sign of von Willebrand disease is mucosal bleeding, usually without evidence of petechiae or bruising, which occurs postoperatively in some affected animals.  Von Willebrand disease should be suspected in animals with clinical signs of a platelet disorder, normal coagulation screening tests (activated partial thromboplastin time [aPTT] and prothrombin time [PT]), adequate platelet counts, and long buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT). BMBT is a good screening test in dogs with signs of a platelet disorder and a normal platelet count.  Diagnosis is confirmed by identification of low vWF concentration in plasma or via DNA screening.  Occasionally, affected animals can have decreased factor VIII coagulant and therefore have prolonged aPTT and activated clotting time (ACT).  Drugs known to interfere with normal platelet function should be avoided in animals with suspected von Willebrand disease. Transfusion of cryoprecipitate, fresh frozen plasma, or fresh whole blood effectively alleviates a bleeding episode.  Type 1 von Willebrand disease could respond to treatment with desmopressin acetate, which causes release of high-molecular-weight multimers from the endothelium. Desmopressin (1 mcg/kg, SC, 30 minutes before surgery, using a sterile solution) can be administered to these dogs before surgery to minimize bleeding complications.  Concomitant hemostatic abnormalities can exacerbate von Willebrand disease. Hypothyroidism was once thought to be associated with von Willebrand disease; both conditions are prevalent in many of the same dog breeds (eg, Doberman Pinschers and Golden Retrievers). Thyroid hormone supplementation in hypothyroid dogs without deficiency of vWF has been found not to increase vWF activity; in fact, in most of the tested dogs, vWF activity decreased (11). Therefore, levothyroxine cannot be recommended as a treatment for von Willebrand disease, and it might even exacerbate the disease.  Chédiak-Higashi Syndrome Chédiak-Higashi syndrome is an autosomal recessive disorder characterized by abnormal granule formation in leukocytes, melanocytes, and platelets (see Morphologic Leukogram Abnormalities). The defect appears to be in microtubule formation; therefore, a decreased number of granules that are abnormally large are evident in numerous types of cells. Diluted coat color results from the defect in the melanocytes.  Leukocytes can have decreased functional ability to phagocytose and kill organisms (an inconsistent finding in animals), and platelets have decreased aggregation and release reactions. Platelets are almost devoid of dense granules and have markedly decreased storage quantities of adenosine diphosphate and serotonin.  Prolonged bleeding in blue smoke Persian cats with Chédiak-Higashi syndrome occurs after venipuncture or surgery. The syndrome also has been diagnosed in mink, cattle, and beige mice with similar bleeding tendencies.  Canine Thrombopathia Canine thrombopathia has been described in Basset Hounds and Landseers as well as some spitz-type dogs. Inheritance is autosomal with variable penetrance.  Platelets have abnormal fibrinogen receptor exposure and impaired dense granule release. Dogs with mucosal bleeding and petechiation that have normal platelet counts and vWF should be suspected of having thrombopathia.  Specific diagnosis of canine thrombopathia requires specialized platelet function testing.  Genetic tests are available for affected breeds to identify carriers and inform breeding.  Bovine Thrombopathia Bovine thrombopathia is an autosomally inherited platelet function defect of Simmental cattle. Bleeding can be mild to severe in affected cattle and is exacerbated by trauma or surgery. Platelets have impaired aggregation responses.  Glanzmann Thrombasthenia Glanzmann thrombasthenia (formerly called thrombasthenic thrombopathia) is an autosomally transmitted disorder that has been diagnosed in Otterhound and Great Pyrenees dogs and in Thoroughbred, Quarter Horse cross, Peruvian Paso, and Oldenburg horses.  Affected animals have prolonged BMBTs and form hematomas at sites of venipuncture or injury. Blood smears show numerous bizarre, giant platelets (30–80% of all platelets).  Because of decreased synthesis of either glycoprotein IIb or IIIa, the membrane receptor glycoprotein IIb/IIIa is decreased or lacking on the surface of platelets. To date, all known affected animals have had a defect in IIb synthesis.  Blood from animals with Glanzmann thrombasthenia does not have normal clot retraction, and platelets do not aggregate normally after stimulation with adenosine diphosphate, collagen, or thrombin.  Canine Platelet Procoagulant Deficiency (Scott Syndrome) Canine platelet procoagulant deficiency (Scott syndrome) is an inherited bleeding disorder in which platelets are unable to exteriorize phosphatidylserine needed as a site of interaction for key clotting factors. This condition has been described rarely in German Shepherd Dogs and is characterized by postoperative hemorrhage and bruising.  Acquired Platelet Function Disorders in Animals Several diseases have been associated with acquired platelet function disorders. Hyperglobulinemia associated with multiple myeloma induces a platelet membrane defect that results in impaired hemostatic function. In uremia associated with any form of renal disease, platelet adhesion and aggregation are decreased.  Liver disease can affect not only platelet number but also platelet function. Because the effects on procoagulant and anticoagulant clotting factors vary, bleeding tendencies are challenging to predict in patients with liver disease.  In addition to affecting platelet number, DIC impairs platelet aggregation.  Numerous drugs also can impair platelet function:  Drugs reported to block platelet receptor binding or to change platelet membrane charge or permeability include furosemide, penicillin, carbenicillin, lidocaine, phentolamine, and chlorpromazine.  Drugs that inhibit the transduction of messages received at the platelet surface include caffeine, theophylline, dipyridamole, and papaverine.  Drugs that inhibit the execution of platelet responses (aggregation, secretion, or thromboxane production) include aspirin, indomethacin, phenylbutazone, other NSAIDs, ticlopidine, pentobarbital, and sulfinpyrazone.  Clopidogrel and related drugs decrease ADP-induced platelet aggregation.  Key Points Clinical signs of platelet disorders include petechiae, ecchymoses, mucosal bleeding, and persistent oozing of blood after injury or surgery.  Thrombocytopenia is much more common than thrombopathia, with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia the most common cause of severe thrombocytopenia in dogs.  Von Willebrand disease is the most common cause of abnormal buccal mucosal bleeding time despite normal platelet count.  For More Information Lattimer KS (ed). Hemostasis. In: Duncan and Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory Medicine: Clinical Pathology. 5th ed. Wiley-Blackwell; 2011:107-123.  eClinPath.com (Cornell University): Platelet Function  Also see pet owner content regarding platelet disorders of dogs, cats, and horses.  References Lee GKC, Barbosa C, Andersen G, et al. Cyclic hematopoiesis in a mixed-breed dog: case report and brief review. J Vet Diagn Invest. 2022;34(6):1006-1009. doi:10.1177/10406387221115179  Jones JB, Lange RD, Jones ES. Cyclic hematopoiesis in a colony of dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1975;166:365–367.  Köster L, et al. Cyclic neutropenia in a basset hound. Vet Rec Case Rep. 2015;3:e000135. doi:10.1136/vetreccr-2014-000135  Lothrop CD Jr, Warren DJ, Souza LM, Jones JB, Moore MA. Correction of canine cyclic hematopoiesis with recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor. Blood. 1988;72(4):1324-1328. doi:10.1182/blood.V72.4.1324.1324  Buechner-Maxwell V, Scott MA, Godber L, Kristensen A. Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia in a Quarter Horse foal. J Vet Intern Med. 1997;11(5):304-308. doi:10.1111/j.1939-1676.1997.tb00470.x  Schreuder BE. Thrombocytopenia in lambs fed with bovine colostrum. Vet Q. 1993;15(1):37-39. doi:10.1080/01652176.1993.9694367  Rozanski EA, Callan MB, Hughes D, Sanders N, Giger U. Comparison of platelet count recovery with use of vincristine and prednisone or prednisone alone for treatment for severe immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2002;220(4):477-481. doi:10.2460/javma.2002.220.477  Kopecny L, Palm CA, Naylor S, Kirby J, Cowgill LD. Application of therapeutic plasma exchange in dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. J Vet Intern Med. 2020;34(4):1576-1581. doi:10.1111/jvim.15836  Jordan HL, Grindem CB, Breitschwerdt EB. Thrombocytopenia in cats: a retrospective study of 41 cases. J Vet Intern Med. 1993;7(5):261-265. doi:10.1111/j.1939-1676.1993.tb01017.x  Ellis J, Bell R, Barnes DC, Miller R. Prevalence and disease associations in feline thrombocytopenia: a retrospective study of 194 cases. J Small Anim Pract. 2018;59(9):531-538. doi:10.1111/jsap.12814  Avgeris S, Lothrop CD Jr, McDonald TP. Plasma von Willebrand factor concentration and thyroid function in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1990;196(6):921-924. doi:10.2460/javma.1990.196.06.921    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Overview of Hemostatic Disorders in Animals Coagulation Disorders in Animals Platelet Disorders in Animals Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals Pathological Thrombosis in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Congenital Coagulation Protein Disorders | Acquired Coagulation Protein Disorders | Key Points | For More Information | References Congenital Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals With a severe deficiency or functional defect of coagulation proteins, clinical signs appear at an early age. Marked decreases in activity of coagulation proteins essential to hemostasis are usually fatal. With < 1% of normal activity, animals can be stillborn or die shortly after birth as a result of massive hemorrhage.  Insufficient production of coagulation proteins or limited access to vitamin K by the immature neonatal liver can exacerbate a coagulation defect.  If activity of any particular coagulation protein is 5–10% of normal, the neonate could survive; however, signs of a congenital coagulation disorder usually appear before the age of 6 months. It is during this time—when teething and routine procedures (eg, vaccination, castration, ovariohysterectomy) are usually performed—that a bleeding tendency can become apparent.  Most of the congenital coagulation protein disorders reported in domestic animals are deficiencies or abnormalities of a single factor.  Factor I (Fibrinogen) Deficiency Primary fibrinogen deficiency can be divided into afibrinogenemia, hypofibrinogenemia, and dysfibrinogenemia.  Congenital afibrinogenemia has been reported in a family of Saanen dairy goats. It has rarely been described in dogs and cats.  Hypofibrinogenemia, accompanied by severe bleeding, has been reported in Saint Bernards and Vizslas and in one mixed-breed dog; the activated clotting time (ACT), activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT), prothrombin time (PT), and thrombin time (TT) were prolonged.  Dysfibrinogenemia has been reported in an inbred family of Borzois. The ACT, aPTT, PT, and TT were prolonged; however, the presence of fibrinogen was revealed by quantitative testing. Affected dogs had mild bleeding episodes with epistaxis and lameness, but trauma or surgery resulted in life-threatening bleeding. To stop the bleeding, IV administration of fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate is the best treatment.  Factor II (Prothrombin) Disorders Factor II (prothrombin) disorders are rare.  Boxers have been reported to have normal concentrations of abnormally functioning prothrombin. The defect is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait.  A disorder of factor II has been reported in English Cocker Spaniels.  Clinical signs in affected puppies (epistaxis and gingival bleeding) decrease with age, and adults bruise easily or have dermatitis. In affected puppies, TT is normal, but ACT, aPTT, and PT are prolonged.  The treatment is transfusion of fresh frozen plasma or fresh whole blood, if RBCs are needed.  Factor VII Deficiency Factor VII deficiency has been reported in Beagles, English Bulldogs, Alaskan Malamutes, Alaskan Klee Kais, Miniature Schnauzers, Boxers, and mixed-breed dogs.  Factor VII deficiency is inherited in an autosomal pattern with incomplete dominance.  Usually, factor VII deficiency is not associated with spontaneous bleeding; however, affected dogs can have bruising or prolonged bleeding after surgery. Prolonged postpartum hemorrhaging has been reported.  Factor VII deficiency is usually diagnosed coincidentally when coagulation screening tests are performed. The PT is prolonged, whereas aPTT and other test results are normal.  Factor VIII Deficiency (Hemophilia A) Factor VIII deficiency (hemophilia A) is the most common inherited bleeding disorder in dogs and cats. It has also been reported in several breeds of horses, including Arabians, Standardbreds, Quarter Horses, and Thoroughbreds.  There is an X-linked pattern of inheritance, so usually females are subclinically affected carriers and males are affected. Rarely, in highly inbred families, breeding of a carrier female with an affected male can produce affected female offspring.  In puppies with factor VIII deficiency, prolonged bleeding occurs from the umbilical vessels after birth; from the gingiva during tooth eruption; and after surgery such as tail docking, dewclaw removal, or ear cropping.  Hemarthrosis accompanied by intermittent lameness, spontaneous hematoma formation, and hemorrhagic body cavity effusions also are common clinical findings in dogs with < 5% of normal factor VIII activity. Animals with 5–10% of normal activity often do not bleed spontaneously but exhibit prolonged bleeding after trauma or surgery. Affected cats and sometimes small dogs can show prolonged bleeding after surgery or trauma; however, rarely do they bleed spontaneously, probably because of their agility and light weight.  Affected animals usually have very low concentrations of factor VIII (< 10%) and prolonged ACT and aPTT. Von Willebrand factor (vWF) concentrations are greater than or equal to normal. Carrier animals have intermediate concentrations of factor VIII (40–60%), and results of coagulation screening tests are usually normal. Care should be taken in diagnosis if animals are < 6 months old, because of possible low production of coagulation factors by an immature liver. Usually, results of coagulation screening tests are normal in carrier animals.  Treatment of bleeding diatheses requires repeated transfusions of cryoprecipitate or fresh frozen plasma (10 mL/kg, every 8–12 hours) until bleeding has been controlled. Unless the patient has clinical signs of anemia, fresh frozen plasma or cryoprecipitate is preferable to whole blood because of possible sensitization to RBC antigens with repeated transfusions.  Factor IX Deficiency (Hemophilia B) Factor IX deficiency (hemophilia B) is diagnosed less often than factor VIII deficiency. It has been reported in several breeds of purebred dogs, a mixed-breed dog, a family of Siamese-cross cats, and a family of British Shorthair cats. The defect is X-linked with carrier females and affected males; however, affected females can occur in closely inbred families.  Clinical signs of factor IX deficiency are similar to those of factor VIII deficiency. Some animals show no signs until trauma or surgery. The ACT and aPTT are prolonged. Carrier animals with 40–60% of normal factor IX activity are usually subclinically affected, and results of coagulation screening tests are normal.  Treatment of factor IX deficiency requires transfusion with fresh frozen plasma (10 mL/kg, every 12 hours) until bleeding resolves. Often, hemorrhage into the abdomen, thorax, or CNS, or between muscle fascial planes, occurs and can be undetected until a crisis.  Factor X Deficiency Factor X deficiency has been reported in a single family of American Cocker Spaniels; the inheritance pattern is autosomal dominant with variable penetrance (1).Factor X deficiency has also been reported in a Chihuahua and a Jack Russell Terrier (2, 3).  Homozygotes usually die early in life or are stillborn because of massive internal hemorrhage. Heterozygotes have mild to severe bleeding problems.  ACT, aPTT, and PT are usually prolonged when animals have < 30% normal factor X activity.  Transfusions with fresh or fresh frozen plasma are required to control hemorrhage.  Factor XI Deficiency Factor XI deficiency has been recognized in Kerry Blue Terriers, a female English Springer Spaniel, a Great Pyrenees dog, Weimaraners, and Holstein cattle.  Inheritance is autosomal; however, whether the gene is dominant or recessive is not known. A single case involving an adult cat that had epistaxis and systemic lupus erythematosus was attributed to a circulating inhibitor of factor XI.  Mild deficiencies usually go undetected. In severe deficiencies with factor XI at 30–40% or less of normal activity, mild prolonged bleeding can occur after trauma or surgery.  Bleeding tendencies in patients with factor XI deficiency usually are not immediate, but delayed 3–4 days. ACT and aPTT are usually prolonged.  Transfusion with fresh frozen plasma (10 mL/kg, IV, once) is sufficient to stop bleeding for up to 3 days.  Factor XII (Hageman Factor) Deficiency In dogs, factor XII (Hageman factor) deficiency has been reported in German Shorthaired Pointers, Standard Poodles, and a family of Miniature Poodles; in cats it is also commonly reported. Affected animals do not have clinical bleeding problems. This deficiency is usually diagnosed coincidentally when coagulation screening tests show prolonged aPTT.  Humans with factor XII deficiency do not have bleeding problems; however, they do show a predisposition to thrombosis or infections, which is attributed to the normal role of factor XII in fibrinolysis and complement activation. Tendencies for thrombosis or infection have not been reported in animals.  Factor XII deficiency has been found to coexist with von Willebrand disease in dogs and with factor IX deficiency in cats. In affected animals, bleeding tendencies are not exacerbated (4, 5).  Factor XII is not present in the plasma of birds, marine mammals, and reptiles, without untoward effects.  Deficiency of Factors II, VII, IX, and X Deficiency of factors II, VII, IX, and X has been described in Devon Rex cats that experienced bleeding, most commonly after surgery. Bleeding can be controlled by vitamin K administration, and some of these cats appear to overcome this bleeding tendency as adults.  Prekallikrein Deficiency Prekallikrein deficiency has been reported in Poodles, a family of miniature horses, and a family of Belgian horses. Clinical bleeding problems are not usually apparent; however, excessive bleeding after castration was reported in one horse (6). The diagnosis is usually made coincidentally when coagulation screening tests are performed. ACT and aPTT are usually prolonged.  Poor Clot Strength Poor clot strength in Greyhounds has been found to cause delayed postoperative bleeding.Viscoelastic testing studies comparing Greyhound and non-Greyhound dogs have shown that Greyhounds have longer times to initial and maximal clot formation, lower maximal amplitude (7, 8), and faster clot breakdown (8). Epsilon-aminocaproic acid is effective at preventing or stopping bleeding in affected dogs (9).  Acquired Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals Liver Disease Most coagulation proteins are produced primarily in the liver. Therefore, liver disease characterized by necrosis, inflammation, neoplasia, or cirrhosis often is associated with decreased production of coagulation proteins, anticoagulants, and fibrinolytic proteins. Because the various coagulation proteins have a relatively short half-life (4 hours–2 days), mild to marked deficiencies secondary to severe hepatopathies can result.  aPTT and/or PT is prolonged in 50–75% of dogs with severe liver disease (10), meaning that the factor activity is < 30% of normal. Because of the wide-reaching impact of liver disease on many aspects of hemostasis, it is difficult to predict bleeding tendencies in affected dogs. Coagulation tests are often performed before liver biopsy.  Severe hepatic diseases can also lead to DIC. Activities of fibrinogen (an acute phase reactant) and vWF (which is produced extrahepatically) may be increased in some individuals with liver disease.  Vitamin K Deficiency Vitamin K is solubilized in mixed micelles before its passive diffusion across the brush border of the intestines. Fat malabsorption associated with inadequate amounts of bile salts (as with biliary obstruction), lymphangiectasia, or severe villous atrophy can result in vitamin deficiency and coagulopathy because the functional vitamin K−dependent factors II, VII, IX, and X cannot undergo carboxylation necessary for their activation.  Ingestion of Anticoagulant Rodenticides Ingestion of anticoagulant rodenticides causes a coagulopathy because functional vitamin K−dependent factors cannot undergo carboxylation necessary for their activation. Inactive precursor coagulation factors II, VII, IX, and X are still produced by the liver; however, gamma-carboxylation of the inactive precursors does not occur, because the rodenticide inhibits the epoxide reductase enzyme required for recycling active vitamin K.  Anticoagulant rodenticide ingredients are classified by generation, with first-generation and intermediate-generation poisons necessitating multiple feedings to kill the target species. Second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides are more potent and kill in a single feeding.  First-generation anticoagulant rodenticides include the coumarin class (containing ingredients like warfarin, pindone, coumafuryl, and coumachlor) and the indanedione class (containing ingredients like chlorophacinone and diphacinone). These two classes are derived from different chemical structures.  Second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides include brodifacoum, bromadiolone, difenacoum, and difethialone.  The half-lives of second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides are much longer; they depress clotting factors for 2–4 weeks, compared to the 7–10 days of depression produced by first- and intermediate-generation anticoagulant rodenticides.  Animals that ingest anticoagulant rodenticides can develop bruising or hematomas over pressure points or in the nasopharynx after minor trauma from ingested hard or sharp particles. Bleeding into body cavities can occur, resulting in acute collapse. Often, affected animals do not bleed within the first 24 hours after ingesting the toxin. aPTT, PT, and ACT are usually prolonged.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Factor VII has the shortest half-life of the vitamin K−dependent coagulation proteins; therefore, prothrombin time is often abnormal before other tests and can be used to monitor response to treatment.  Factor VII has the shortest half-life of the vitamin K−dependent coagulation proteins; therefore, PT is often abnormal before other tests and can be used to monitor response to treatment.  In cases of acute ingestion, emetics, absorbents, and cathartics are administered to minimize absorption. Vitamin K therapy is often initiated in animals exposed to anticoagulant rodenticides even if they do not show clinical signs.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Vitamin K therapy is often initiated in animals exposed to anticoagulant rodenticides even if they do not show clinical signs of poisoning.  The recommended treatment for anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning is to administer phytonadione (vitamin K1) at an initial dosage of 2.5–3 mg/kg, SC, once, followed by 1.25–2.5 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours for 14–28 days. PT should be measured 48 hours after completion of the initial course, and if it has not yet normalized, treatment should be continued for another week (followed by measurement of PT again 48 hours later).  Intoxication with long-acting, second-generation anticoagulant rodenticides is more common, so shorter treatment durations should be considered only if the animal is known to have ingested a short-acting, first-generation anticoagulant rodenticide. IV administration of vitamin K1 is not recommended, because anaphylactic reactions can result. Administration of vitamin K3 is not useful. Treatment protocols are similar for most domestic species.  In addition to instituting vitamin K therapy, clinically affected (eg, bleeding) animals could require treatment with blood products. The vitamin K–dependent clotting factors can be transfused via frozen, fresh frozen, or fresh plasma. RBCs can be delivered to clinically anemic patients as packed RBCs. Finally, clotting factors combined with RBCs can be delivered in fresh or stored whole blood.  Ingestion of Moldy Sweet Clover Dicumarol formation in moldy sweet clover antagonizes vitamin K as described above for anticoagulant rodenticides. Ingestion can cause hemorrhage. Cattle are most commonly affected; horses, sheep, pigs, and other species can also be affected (see Sweet Clover Poisoning). Treatment is similar to that for anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning, but the duration is short: phytonadione (vitamin K1) administered at 1–1.5 mg/kg, SC, every 24 hours for 2–3 days.  Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation DIC is not a primary disease; rather it is a syndrome that occurs secondary to numerous underlying diseases, such as bacterial, viral, rickettsial, protozoal, or parasitic diseases; heat stroke; burns; neoplasia; or severe trauma. Commonly, the underlying disease causes sepsis or systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS), an uncontrolled mixed pro- and anti-inflammatory state characterized by massive activation and consumption of coagulation proteins, endogenous inhibitors, fibrinolytic proteins, and platelets.  In the initial stage of DIC, the animal is hypercoagulable because of circulating inflammatory mediators that activate hemostasis via increased exposure of TF and inhibitor consumption. With time, consumption of coagulation factors can lead to a hypocoagulable state with overt bleeding.  Because of the progressive nature of DIC, clinical findings vary considerably and range from no overt signs of disease, accompanied by subtle, if any, changes in routine hemostasis parameters (aPTT, PT, D-dimer, fibrinogen, and platelet count), to clinical signs of organ failure associated with microvascular thrombosis in vital organs, finally culminating in overt bleeding. The latter has historically been considered the typical DIC case, in which there are also pronounced alterations in hemostasis parameters and a drop in platelet count.  Viscoelastic testing can differentiate the DIC stage in dogs. Dogs in the hypercoagulable stage have a much better chance of survival than do dogs in the hypocoagulable stage. This higher chance of survival is likely because of early and aggressive intervention through supportive and/or antithrombotic therapy while the underlying disease is treated. Aggressive treatment likely minimizes thromboembolic complications and delays or even prevents progression to overt signs.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Viscoelastic testing can differentiate the DIC stage in dogs. Dogs in the hypercoagulable stage have a much better chance of survival than do dogs in the hypocoagulable stage.  In veterinary medicine, laboratory diagnosis of DIC is not standardized, and hemostatic function test results are not consistent; however, diagnosis of DIC is often based on the presence of three or more abnormal hemostatic parameters, such as aPTT, PT, fibrinogen concentration, D-dimer concentration, platelet count, and RBC morphology, along with a predisposing underlying disease. The increasing availability of viscoelastic testing has made definitive diagnosis of DIC possible. Postmortem fibrinolysis makes necropsy an insensitive diagnostic criterion.  Treatment of DIC must be directed first at diagnosing and treating the underlying disease. In addition, if the patient is hypercoagulable, heparin is indicated. If hypocoagulability and bleeding are present, heparin is no longer indicated; instead, fresh frozen plasma should be administered. Supportive care with fluids and possibly plasma expanders helps to maintain effective circulating volume.  Key Points Animals with clotting factor abnormalities are likely to develop hematomas or bleed into body cavities or joints.  Important inherited factor abnormalities often become evident at teething or after surgery.  Treatment of anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis can require 4–6 weeks of treatment with vitamin K1.  DIC is always secondary to another condition, and treatment must address the underlying disorder as well as the coagulopathy.  For More Information Animal Health Diagnostic Center, Cornell University: Comparative Coagulation  Also see pet owner content regarding coagulation disorders of dogs, cats, and horses.  References Dodds WJ. Canine factor X (Stuart-Prower factor) deficiency. J Lab Clin Med. 1973;82(4):560-566.  Heuss J, Weatherton L. A case of factor X deficiency in a Chihuahua dog. Can Vet J. 2016;57(8):865-868.  Cook AK, Werner LL, O'Neill SL, Brooks M, Feldman BF. Factor X deficiency in a Jack Russell terrier. Vet Clin Pathol. 1993;22(3):68-71. doi:10.1111/j.1939-165x.1993.tb00655.x  Randolph JF, Center SA, Dodds WJ. Factor XII deficiency and von Willebrand's disease in a family of miniature poodle dogs. Cornell Vet. 1986;76(1):3-10.  Dillon AR, Boudreaux MK. Combined factors IX and XII deficiencies in a family of cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1988;193(7):833-834.  Geor RJ, Jackson ML, Lewis KD, Fretz PB. Prekallikrein deficiency in a family of Belgian horses. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1990;197(6):741-745. doi:10.2460/javma.1990.197.06.741  Vilar P, Couto CG, Westendorf N, Iazbik C, Charske J, Marín L. Thromboelastographic tracings in retired racing Greyhounds and in non-Greyhound dogs. J Vet Intern Med. 2008;22(2):374-379. doi:10.1111/j.1939-1676.2008.0061.x  Chang J, Jandrey KE, Burges JW, Kent MS. Comparison of healthy blood donor Greyhounds and non-Greyhounds using a novel point-of-care viscoelastic coagulometer. J Vet Emerg Crit Care (San Antonio). 2021;31(6):766-772. doi:10.1111/vec.13129  Marín LM, Iazbik MC, Zaldivar-Lopez S, Guillaumin J, McLoughlin MA, Couto CG. Epsilon aminocaproic acid for the prevention of delayed postoperative bleeding in retired racing greyhounds undergoing gonadectomy. Vet Surg. 2012;41(5):594-603. doi:10.1111/j.1532-950X.2012.00965.x  Badylak SF, Dodds WJ, Van Vleet JF. Plasma coagulation factor abnormalities in dogs with naturally occurring hepatic disease. Am J Vet Res. 1983;44(12):2336-2340.    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Overview of Hemostatic Disorders in Animals Coagulation Disorders in Animals Platelet Disorders in Animals Coagulation Protein Disorders in Animals Pathological Thrombosis in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Pathological Thrombosis in Animals ByErin McQuinn, DVM, DACVIM (SAIM), Iowa State University College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Feb 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Congenital Anticoagulant Disorders | Acquired Procoagulant Disorders | Key Points | For More Information | References Abnormal clot formation is an important cause of morbidity and death in veterinary medicine that, broadly speaking, is due to aberrations in one or more factors of the Virchow triad: blood flow stasis, endothelial dysfunction, and hypercoagulability. Abnormal clot formation can lead to thrombosis, clot extension, and thromboembolism.  Clinically, abnormal clot formation can go unnoticed; however, thromboembolic disease of substantial size or major sites (eg, brain, lungs, aorta) can cause profound clinical signs, organ damage, and death. Thromboembolic disease complicates many common diseases in veterinary medicine.  Congenital Anticoagulant Disorders in Animals Congenital deficiency of any anticoagulant protein has not been recognized in domestic animals. If such a condition exists in animals, it is probably incompatible with life.  Acquired Procoagulant Disorders in Animals The presence of hypercoagulability is difficult to assess clinically in dogs and cats.  The importance of hypercoagulability and thromboembolic disease was not well defined in veterinary medicine until the advent of viscoelastic testing, which enables global assessment of hemostatic function in whole blood. Advantages of viscoelastic testing include evaluation of the viscoelastic properties of developing blood clots (including clot formation, kinetics, strength, stability, and resolution) and immediate detection of hyper- and hypocoagulable states.  Certain diseases in animals have been associated with increased risk of thrombosis. Cats with cardiomyopathy, especially those with an enlarged left atrium, can develop large thromboemboli in the aorta or brachial artery. Heartworm disease can also be associated with thrombosis in cats. Thrombosis has been reported in dogs with protein-losing nephropathies, hyperadrenocorticism, protein-losing enteropathy, neoplasia, heat stroke, sepsis, heartworm disease, and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Dogs with pancreatitis have been found to have evidence of hypercoagulability, and in some dogs the presence of multiple comorbid processes listed here increases the risk of thrombosis. Thrombi and thromboemboli have been reported in horses with systemic inflammatory diseases (eg, colic, laminitis, or equine ehrlichial colitis) and in instances of prolonged jugular catheter placement and infusion of drugs that irritate the vasculature.  Neoplasia is also a risk factor for hypercoagulability and likely associated complications, such as thromboembolic disease. Many cells and proteins involved in maintaining hemostasis are also involved in cancer growth, invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis. Deep vein thrombosis is an important clinical complication in human cancer patients; however, whether the same is true in dogs with cancer is unknown.  In protein-losing nephropathies (eg, glomerulopathies, nephrotic syndrome, renal amyloidosis), a deficiency of antithrombin has been well documented. With a molecular weight of 57,000 kilodaltons (kD), antithrombin is similar in size to albumin (60,000 kD); therefore, glomerular lesions sufficient to result in albumin loss also result in antithrombin loss. Other abnormalities identified in renal disease include increased responsiveness of platelets to agonists, increased procoagulant activities, and decreased antiplasmin activity.  Hypercholesterolemia has been associated with increased risk of thromboembolism. It is hypothesized that endothelial and platelet membrane phospholipid concentrations are altered, leading to damaged vasculature and increased platelet responsiveness to agonists, respectively. Increased production of thromboxane via the cyclooxygenase pathway in platelets has been observed. Diseases characterized by hypercholesterolemia include hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes mellitus, nephrotic syndrome, hypothyroidism, and pancreatitis. All have been associated with increased risk of thrombus formation, often pulmonary thrombosis.  In cats with cardiomyopathy, endomyocardial lesions and turbulent blood flow through the heart chambers and valves secondary to altered myocardial functioning are thought to initiate thrombus formation. Specific deficiencies of anticoagulant or fibrinolytic proteins have not been reported. Although antithrombin is markedly increased in these cats, it does not provide protective benefits. Cats with cardiac disease secondary to hyperthyroidism are often treated not only with drugs to alter thyroid function, but also with drugs (eg, propranolol, atenolol, or diltiazem) that abate clinical signs of cardiac dysfunction.  Horses that have colic associated with endotoxemia have decreased plasminogen activity and protein C antigen concentration. Their mortality rate and risk of thrombus formation are increased. Laminitis is thought to be the end result of several diverse systemic disorders. Microthrombi in the vasculature of the hoof lamina have been identified in the early stages of laminitis. One theory is that endotoxin has direct effects on the vasculature and activates contact factors in the coagulation cascade. Ischemia of the lamina secondary to edema, vascular compression, and possible blood shunting at the level of the coronet also damage endothelium. When circulation is reestablished, reperfusion injury results, and the exposed subendothelial collagen promotes thrombosis.  Thromboprophylaxis (clot prevention) is standard treatment in some diseases of small animals, including protein-losing nephropathy and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (1). In addition, clot prevention may be considered in small animals with multiple hypercoagulable diseases.  In an animal with thrombi or thromboemboli, it is imperative to diagnose and manage any underlying disease processes, and to provide good supportive care, including pain management.Maintenance of adequate tissue perfusion is critical.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Diagnosis and management of underlying diseases and provision of supportive care, including pain management, is imperative in animals with thrombi or thromboemboli.  Dissolution of clots and prevention of clot extension by administration of anticoagulants (eg, heparin, direct factor Xa inhibitors) and antiplatelet drugs (eg, aspirin, clopidogrel) has had mixed success, in part because of a lack of evidence regarding effective dosing of these drugs for clot prevention.  Unfractionated heparin is most commonly used as initial treatment. Low-molecular-weight heparins have been evaluated in cats with aortic thromboembolism; however, the cost is appreciably higher, and no clear benefit has been shown when compared with unfractionated heparin.  Heparin facilitates the action of antithrombin, but to be effective, adequate antithrombin must be present. In dogs with protein-losing nephropathies or in horses with endotoxemia, plasma transfusion could be necessary before heparin therapy is effective. For clot prevention in dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, individually adjusting heparin doses according to anti-Xa activity has been found to improve outcomes, compared with nonindividualized (standardized) dosing (2).  Drugs that inhibit factor Xa (eg, rivaroxaban and apixaban) can be administered orally and do not require frequent monitoring. Their use is being studied in dogs and cats; however, expense is an issue. Currently, the only treatment shown to increase survival time after the initial thrombotic event in cats is clopidogrel (18.75 mg/cat, PO, every 24 hours longterm), which inhibits platelet function.  Use of fibrinolytic compounds to enhance dissolution of clots has shown promise in animals.  Tissue plasminogen activator (TPA), also known as alteplase, has more fibrin specificity than does streptokinase or urokinase and, therefore, provides more localized fibrinolytic effects. The main deterrent to the use of TPA is its high cost. A study of cats with aortic thrombosis that were treated with TPA found a risk for reperfusion injury and hyperkalemia after the clot dissolved (3).  Streptokinase is more available and less expensive; however, the therapeutic dose is difficult to determine. In addition, many animals have naturally occurring antibodies to streptokinase as a result of previous streptococcal infections.  Key Points Many of the underlying diseases that cause DIC can also cause localized thromboembolism.  Aortic thromboembolism in cats with cardiomyopathy has a guarded prognosis, as well as risk of recurrence.  Thromboprophylaxis (clot prevention) is recommended for a number of diseases in small animals including protein-losing nephropathy and immune-mediated hemolytic anemia.