Collection and Submission of Laboratory Samples from Animals ByRebekah G. Gunn-Christie, DVM, DACVP, Antech Diagnostics Reviewed ByJoyce Carnevale, DVM, DABVP, College of Veterinary Medicine, Iowa State University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2023 | Modified Sept 2024 Packaging of Samples for Shipment | Samples for Histologic Evaluation | Samples for Microbiological Testing | Samples for Toxicological Testing | Samples for Hematological Testing | Samples for Serum Biochemical Analysis | Samples for Urinalysis | Samples for Serologic Testing | Samples for Cytologic Evaluation | Samples for Fluid Analysis | Samples for Flow Cytometry | Genetic Analysis | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (9) Tables (0) Videos (0) Each veterinary diagnostic laboratory offers a unique set of diagnostic tests that is subject to frequent changes as new and improved tests become available. The protocols for sample collection and submission are therefore also subject to change.  The practitioner and diagnostic laboratory staff must maintain good communication to complete their diagnostic efforts efficiently and provide optimal service to the client. Practitioners must be specific and clear in their test requests. The laboratory staff will provide guidance regarding sample collection and handling protocols, as well as assistance in the interpretation of test results.  Most diagnostic laboratories publish user guidelines with preferred protocols for sample collection and submission; however, the following broad recommendations are fairly standard.  A detailed case history should be included with submitted samples. This information is particularly critical for the interpretation of samples submitted for cytologic and histologic evaluation. The submission form should be protected in a waterproof bag to avoid damage from any fluids in the packaged materials.  A detailed case history should include the following elements:  owner's first and last name  species  breed or size/weight (if breed unknown)  sex  age  animal identification  relevant clinical signs  gross appearance (including size and anatomic location) of lesions  previous treatment, including response to treatment (if any)  results of relevant diagnostic testing, such as CBC, serum biochemical analysis, cytologic and histologic evaluation, and imaging studies  for population health studies, morbidity and mortality in the group  If a zoonotic disease is suspected, this should also be clearly indicated on the submission form to alert laboratory personnel.  Packaging of Samples from Animals for Shipment The shipment of biological specimens should comply with protocols established by the courier or shipping service used. In some instances, air transport requires compliance with International Aviation and Transportation Association (IATA) regulations for hazardous materials.  These regulations include restrictions on the volume of formalin that can be shipped in a container: no more than 30 mL of free liquid solution in each inner container, and no more than 1 L in the entire outer package. Rather than shipping large volumes of formalin, tissue samples can be fixed in-house for at least 24 hours in an appropriate volume and then transferred into a smaller volume of fresh formalin for shipment.  Shipments with fresh tissue samples are required to be clearly labeled:  UN2814, Infectious substances, affecting humans  UN2900, Infectious substances, affecting animals  UN3373, Biological substances, Category B  Most veterinary diagnostic samples are classified as Category B (an infectious substance not in a form generally capable of causing permanent disability or life-threatening or fatal disease in otherwise healthy humans or animals when exposure to it occurs). If high-risk or reportable diseases are suspected, it is essential to contact state and federal veterinary agencies regarding necessary shipment precautions.  Further details can be found at the International Air Transport Association website and the US Postal Service Postal Explorer website as well as commercial courier websites.  A fundamental approach to packaging samples involves a 3-layer barrier to protect them:  The sample is placed in an appropriate primary container (sealed jar, bag, or tube).  The primary container is then enclosed within a secondary container, which also includes absorbent material.  The secondary container is then placed in the shipping box (tertiary container), which often houses refrigerant or cold packs as well as various cushioning materials (eg, polystyrene foam) to protect the sample. Ideally, the tertiary container is a sturdy polystyrene refrigerator box or a cardboard box lined with a fitted polystyrene lining.  Items such as syringes, obstetrical gloves, and containers without sealable orifices are not suitable for shipment. Under no circumstances should needles, scalpel blades, or any other potentially injurious item (eg, broken microscope slides with sharp edges) be submitted to the lab.  Liquid samples should not ship in plastic bags; instead, a sealable jar should be used. Waterproof markers should be used when labeling specimen bags and containers; at a minimum, patient identification and specimen type (eg, urine, serum, plasma) are critical labeling information.  Coolant materials should be sealed in separate plastic bags to prevent condensation damage. Refrigerant or cold packs should not be placed in direct contact with samples, such as tubes of whole blood, that could suffer adverse effects if frozen in transit.  The suitably protected, completed submission form must be included.  If dry ice is used, this should be noted on the cardboard box label, and the lid should not be sealed with tape. Otherwise, CO2 released from the dry ice could increase pressure and damage the package or contents.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Histologic Evaluation Tissues for microscopic examination collected either via biopsy or during necropsy can be critical to obtaining a diagnosis. Immunohistochemical (IHC) and other advanced tests that can be applied to formalin-fixed tissue further reinforce the utility of histologic evaluation as diagnostic technique.  Autolyzed tissues are generally useless for histologic evaluation; prompt necropsy and organ sampling are critical.  Tissue should not be frozen prior to fixation.  Other than CNS tissues, samples collected for histologic evaluation should never be > 1 cm thick (preferably 5–7 mm) and must be immediately placed in ≥ 10 times their volume of phosphate-buffered 10% formalin to ensure adequate fixation.  Tissues should be representative of any lesions present and, in the case of cutaneous punch biopsies and biopsies obtained via endoscopic collection, be centered directly on the grossly visible lesions.  Wedge biopsies or tissue samples collected at necropsy should include some of the apparently normal surrounding tissue; the interface between normal and abnormal tissue may provide key information.  Excisional biopsies of small tumors (< 1.5 cm) may be cut in half. Larger tumors may be sliced like bread so that formalin can penetrate to the face of each slice. Alternatively, several representative samples (7 mm wide, including the interface of normal and abnormal) may be collected.  Rather than shipping large volumes of formalin, tissue samples can be fixed in-house for at least 24 hours in an appropriate volume and then transferred into a smaller volume of fresh formalin for shipment.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Rather than shipping large volumes of formalin, tissue samples can be fixed in-house for at least 24 hours in an appropriate volume and then transferred into a smaller volume of fresh formalin for shipment.  Submission of tissue that has been stored in formalin is acceptable within any time frame, although quality of sample will degrade over time. Prolonged formalin fixation can adversely affect advanced testing; for example, immunohistochemical testing is not recommended for tissue that has been stored in formalin for > 7 weeks because results may be invalid.  Samples should be shipped in laboratory-approved unbreakable containers with screw-top lids and packed in a manner that prevents spillage or freezing during shipment (see Packaging of Samples for Shipment).  Specific tissues collected at necropsy require additional attention:  Because the GI mucosa decomposes rapidly, short sections of gut collected at necropsy should be opened lengthwise to allow adequate fixation.  If the spinal cord is submitted, the dura mater should be carefully incised lengthwise to permit more rapid penetration to the cord.  Fixing the brain poses a special dilemma, especially if a neuroanatomical location of the lesions within the organ could not be determined antemortem.  Ideally, a whole, intact, fixed brain is required for complete histologic evaluation.  Immersion of the brain for many days in a large volume of formalin is required for adequate fixation; consequently, brains are commonly transported in an only partially fixed state. If the specimen can be shipped by overnight delivery, it may be acceptable to send a chilled, carefully packaged, unfixed brain, which can then be processed at the diagnostic laboratory.  Often, the brain is halved longitudinally and one half is sent unfixed (fresh), properly refrigerated, for microbiological testing, while the other half partially fixes in transit. This method can prove unsatisfactory if a solitary unilateral lesion is involved. Slicing the brain into widths suitable for rapid fixation introduces considerable fixation artifact and should be avoided if possible; fixing the intact (or halved) brain in a large volume of formalin for > 24 hours is preferred.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Microbiological Testing Any specific infectious agents that are suspected clinically should be noted on the submission form; some organisms have specific growth requirements (eg, anaerobic culture, special media) that may not be routinely used in laboratories unless the pathogen was cited as a differential diagnosis.  Laboratory techniques and capabilities for microbiological testing vary; however, most tests rely on either the growth or visualization of intact viable organisms or the detection of the nucleic acids and proteins of these pathogens. Therefore, unfixed specimens (tissue, fluid, etc) should be collected aseptically and shipped promptly to avoid degradation.  If microbial culture of a fluid specimen such as urine or a cavitary effusion is a possibility, a separate aliquot of the fluid in a sterile, additive-free container should be submitted. Tubes containing EDTA or other preservatives are generally ideal for cytologic evaluation but unacceptable for culturing.  If PCR assays are to be performed, it is particularly important to avoid cross contamination between multiple animals in a submission; this principle applies to tissues, fluids, and even dissection instruments.  Furthermore, swabs for PCR analysis should not be placed in agar or charcoal-based transport media, and calcium alginate swabs should be avoided. Instead, sterile cotton- or polyester-tipped applicators should be shipped in a tube, either dry (without transport media) or with a few drops of sterile saline solution or viral transport media, depending on the individual laboratory's requirements.  Requirements for PCR assay can vary widely by specific PCR test, and consulting the recipient laboratory before obtaining the sample is strongly encouraged.  Some test protocols may permit pooling of organ specimens from an individual; however, it is generally preferable that each tissue be collected into separate, clearly labeled sterile bags or tubes for shipping. Gut samples must never be pooled in a container with other tissue samples.  Tissues and fluids for most microbiological assays may be frozen before shipment, but freezing is generally undesirable if samples can be chilled and delivered directly to the laboratory within 24 hours after collection.  Exceptions to this rule include analysis for certain toxins, such as those of Clostridium perfringens and C botulinum, in which degradation of the toxin must be prevented by prompt freezing after collection. Adequate coolant should be provided so that samples remain chilled (or frozen) until they reach the laboratory.  Fecal samples for parasitological testing should be submitted chilled in appropriately sealed containers. Freezing may have little impact on routine flotation or sedimentation tests but will negate the possibility of Baermann analysis for nematode larvae. Ectoparasites or nematodes being submitted for identification should be submitted in vials containing 70% alcohol.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Toxicological Testing If a known toxin is suspected, a specific analysis should always be requested—laboratories cannot just “check for poisoning.” A complete description of clinical and epidemiological findings may help differentiate poisoning from infectious diseases that mimic poisoning.  Pearls & Pitfalls  If a known toxin is suspected, a specific analysis should always be requested—laboratories cannot just “check for poisoning.”  The most critical samples to be collected are generally the following:  gastric contents  liver  kidney  whole blood  plasma or serum  urine  There are also some exceptions, such as the collection of cerebral tissue for cholinesterase analysis.  For some investigations, the diagnosis requires analysis of feed or water. If there is doubt regarding sample submission procedures, the laboratory should be contacted.  Freezing is critical to prevent the degradation of a few analytes, such as cholinesterase, zinc phosphide, and sodium fluoroacetate (compound 1080). However, for most analytes, overnight shipping of chilled specimens will suffice.  The containers for packing and transporting specimens should be free of chemicals. Plastic containers (eg, jars) are ideal, and jars with metal tops should be avoided. Samples should be packed individually and all containers labeled.  If legal action is a possibility, all containers for shipment should be either sealed so that tampering can be detected or hand-carried to the laboratory and a receipt obtained. The chain of custody must be accurately documented.  If feed or water is suspected as the source of poisoning, chilled samples of these along with any descriptive feed tag should accompany the tissue samples. If at all possible, a representative composite sample of the feed should be submitted from the suspect lot or shipment (ie, aliquots from the top, middle, and bottom of the feed container).  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Hematological Testing Routine hematological tests require anticoagulated whole blood filled to the appropriate fill volume for the specimen collection tube. Overfilling or underfilling of tubes can cause unreliable analytic results due to an incorrect blood-additive ratio.  Ideally, several blood smears should be included. Blood smears should be prepared immediately after the sample has been collected in order to minimize artifacts, including altered erythrocyte morphology, platelet clumping, and general cell deterioration.  Anticoagulated blood should be kept refrigerated; blood smears should be stored at room temperature. EDTA is the anticoagulant of choice for mammalian CBCs.  EDTA is acceptable for most, but not all, nonmammalian species. Blood from stingrays, some bony fish, and some reptilian and avian species undergoes hemolysis when collected into EDTA, so heparin is commonly used for these species.  Blood for coagulation testing should be collected into a citrate (blue-top) tube containing trisodium citrate (3.2% or 3.8%, as specified by the reference laboratory). It is imperative that the tube be filled to the appropriate fill volume because underfilling can cause falsely prolonged clotting times.  For plasma-based assays, citrated plasma typically must be separated from whole blood within 6 hours after collection for measurement of prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT). Plasma is separated by centrifugation at 1,500g for 15 minutes, after which the plasma is transferred to an additive-free plastic secondary tube using a disposable plastic pipette.  Plasma should ideally be analyzed within 1 hour after separation. However, many samples for coagulation testing are sent to reference laboratories for analysis, and adherence to laboratory-specific guidelines pertaining to specimen storage is advised.  Freezing of whole blood causes cell lysis and gross hemolysis, which interfere with testing; freezing of whole blood (during storage or specimen transport) must be avoided.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Serum Biochemical Analysis Anticoagulants present in plasma may result in spuriously increased or decreased test analyte values (eg, samples contaminated with potassium-EDTA have artifactually elevated potassium concentrations and decreased calcium concentrations); therefore, by default, serum should be submitted.  However, in some instances, heparinized plasma may be acceptable or, possibly, required. Consultation with the lab before collecting the specimen is recommended for any nonroutine tests or species.  Because lipemia can interfere with a number of chemistry tests for dogs and cats, food withholding is advisable for 12 hours before samples are collected unless there is a potential medical contraindication, such as with pediatric patients or toy dog breeds.  For serum samples, the blood should be drawn into a serum (red-top) tube or serum separator (tiger-top) tube. The sample should be held at room temperature for 20–30 minutes to allow complete clot formation and retraction. Incomplete clot formation may cause the serum to gel due to latent fibrin formation.  The clot should be separated from the glass by gently rimming the tube walls with an applicator stick to loosen the clot. The sample should then be centrifuged at moderate speed (~450 rpm) for 10 minutes.  If the sample has been collected into a serum separator tube, centrifugation will cause a layer of polymer gel to lodge between the packed cells and the serum. The gel layer should be inspected to ensure the integrity of the barrier, and repeated centrifugation is recommended if there is a visible crack in this layer.  If a serum (red-top) tube has been used, the serum should be removed and transferred to a clean tube to minimize artifacts (eg, glycolysis in the cellular component of the blood sample may result in an artifactually decreased glucose concentration). Serum should be refrigerated or frozen until analyzed. Delays in analysis may adversely affect the results for a number of analytes.  Rough handling of the sample or incomplete separation of erythrocytes from serum may promote hemolysis, which can interfere with certain tests. For chemistry panels, 0.5 mL of serum is typically preferred, although minimum laboratory requirements may vary and should be consulted for serum volumes < 0.5 mL.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Urinalysis Urine samples should be clearly labeled with specimen type because urine and serum may be grossly indistinguishable.  Noting the method through which the urine was obtained (free catch, catheterization, cystocentesis, etc) can be helpful for interpretation of findings; for example, free catch samples may have bacterial contaminants from the external genitalia and perineum, and catheterized samples often have greater numbers of transitional epithelial or urothelial cells due to mechanical exfoliation from passing of the catheter.  Clear specimen containers can facilitate gross examination of the urine. However, if urine is not evaluated within 30 minutes after collection, care must be taken to protect it from exposure to ultraviolet light, which causes degradation of urine constituents, including bilirubin.  Lids must be securely screwed on to prevent leakage, evaporation, or volatilization of ketones (if present). Containers must not be reused because traces of detergent can interfere with chemical analysis and bacterial contaminants can proliferate during specimen storage and transit.   Urine should be stored and shipped chilled, although it should be noted that crystal precipitation can occur. Urine is a caustic environment that causes rapid degradation of formed elements, including cells.  If urinary tract disease reflected by the sediment examination (eg, inflammation, infection, proliferative process involving neoplasia) is suspected, cytologic smears prepared from fresh urine sediment should be submitted along with the urine sample. Cytologic smears are air-dried and are prepared as described in the Samples for Cytologic Evaluation section.  As with other fluid samples, volume requirements apply to samples for urinalysis. The preferred volume is generally 5–6 mL, although lesser volumes may be accepted, depending on the lab.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Serologic Testing Serologic testing generally requires serum, but plasma is often satisfactory. Samples should be collected as described for serum biochemical analysis and should always be free of hemolysis.  In some instances, paired samples may be required for an adequate diagnosis. The acute sample should be collected early in the course of the disease and frozen. The convalescent sample should be collected 10–14 days later, and both samples should be forwarded to the laboratory at the same time.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Cytologic Evaluation For superficial mass effects, sampling by fine needle (ie, aspiration or coring/"woodpecker" technique) is typically of higher diagnostic yield and more representative of the primary lesion than samples obtained via surface impression. Impression smears are prone to contamination with debris and flora of the skin or environment, or may represent only secondary inflammation or infection.   Aspirated material must be spread into a monolayer (ie, approximately half the cells touch but do not overlap) after application to the slide (see lymphocyte and mesenchymal cell slides).  Monolayer of cytologic smear, lymphocytes   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Monolayer of cytologic smear, mesenchymal cells   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  The preferred spreading method involves gentle horizontal smearing using a second slide that is placed on top of the material after it is deposited on the bottom slide (see optimal preparation slide). This technique is superior to the vertical pull-apart technique (see pull-apart preparation slide).   Cytology smear with optimal preparation technique   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Pull-apart slide preparation   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Excessive specimen density and cytolysis inhibit the ability to adequately evaluate cells in cytologic specimens (see Excessive specimen density, low magnification and high magnification slides; see also Excessive cytolysis (cell lysis) slide). Only intact cells can be evaluated cytologically because cytolysis introduces artifacts that can mimic malignancy, such as enlargement of nuclei and increased prominence of nucleoli.  Excessive specimen density, low magnification   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Excessive specimen density, high magnification   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Excessive cytolysis (cell lysis)   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Both the pull-apart technique and the lack of any effort to spread the material (ie, simple air drying of droplet-form deposited biological material) are prone to excessive specimen density and cytolysis, and may be nondiagnostic (see dense specimen without spreading slide).  Specimen deposited on slide without spreading   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Samples with a fluidic component can be spread in the same manner as blood smears. Highly cellular fluids may be smeared directly; fluids of low cellularity should be centrifuged to concentrate the cells.  Slides should be stored at room temperature and protected from dust as well as excessive humidity and prolonged exposure to light. It is important to physically label slides with patient identification as well as the source of the cytologic sample; labeling only slide boxes or cartons is unreliable because slides may be separated from the containers or containers reused.  Samples containing excessive ultrasound or lubricant gel may be nondiagnostic because this material is microscopically opaque and obscures cells as well as causing poor cellular stain uptake.  Other practical considerations for preparation of cytologic samples include always using fresh slides, avoidance of coverslips and acetate tape, and ensuring that cellular material is deposited towards the center of a single side of the slide (see specimen on both sides slide).  As digital scanning of slides becomes more prevalent in diagnostic labs, it is not possible for a pathologist to simply flip over the slide on their microscope to focus on the material on the opposite slide. In addition, if the material on the two sides overlaps, it is possible that the net effect will be material that is too thick to adequately assess.  Specimen present on both sides of the slide   Image Courtesy of Dr. Rebekah Gunn-Christie.  Exposure of blood and cytologic smears to formalin or formalin fumes (including proximity to sealed jars of formalin) will interfere with adequate staining and evaluation, potentially resulting in a nondiagnostic specimen. These slide preparations must never be submitted to the laboratory in the same package as formalin-fixed tissues.  Air-dried, unfixed smears are usually appropriate for immunocytochemical (ICC) staining; however, in some instances, shipping samples in tubes containing transport media is recommended. If special stains including ICC are anticipated, the laboratory should be contacted prior to submission to ensure their laboratory-specific protocol is followed.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Fluid Analysis Analysis of cavitary (peritoneal, pleural, and pericardial) effusions and other fluids (eg, synovial fluid, CSF) includes determination of protein content, total erythrocyte and WBC counts, and cytologic evaluation. Other tests may be performed depending on the source or appearance (eg, chylous fluid) of the effusion.  A sample of fluid should be collected into an EDTA (purple-top) tube for routine analysis. A second sample should be collected into a serum (red-top) tube if microbial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing or biochemical analyses are anticipated. These samples should be shipped chilled but not frozen.  Cytologic evaluation without measurement of other parameters (eg, total protein concentration, cell counts) is usually acceptable for mass effects characterized by a fluidic component.  Smears for cytologic evaluation should be prepared from a drop of the fluid immediately after the sample has been collected to minimize cell deterioration and other in vitro artifacts. Cytologic slides should be labeled with patient ID, source, and type of preparation (eg, direct, concentrated/sediment) and fluid and then submitted to the lab.  Samples of CSF should be collected into small EDTA tubes and shipped immediately with high priority; the cytologic value of CSF samples degrades rapidly, and the low cellularity makes examination of direct smears unrewarding. If sufficient CSF is available, then a serum (red-top) tube sample may be useful for serologic evaluation or culture attempts.  Preparation of Samples from Animals for Flow Cytometry Flow cytometry can be performed on samples with an inherently fluidic composition (whole blood, cavitary effusions) and on organ (eg, lymph node, bone marrow) aspirates collected into fluid medium. Intact, well-preserved cells are necessary for accurate results. Consequently, samples 48 hours old or less are usually needed to ensure cell viability.  Specimen volumes can vary, depending on type of sample (eg, whole blood versus organ aspirate), and the lab should be consulted before collection of the specimen.  The lab may have additional recommendations pertaining to sample collection and submission. For example, depending on specimen transit times, it may be advisable to submit samples early in the week to avoid delays spanning the weekend.  Preparation of Samples for Genetic Analysis in Animals Tests based on the detection of specific genetic features range from karyotype analysis to the identification of specific genes.  The laboratory offering the test should be contacted to determine the specifics of sample collection and handling; required samples range from hair to skin or blood. Many blood-based analyses require collection into acid-citrate-dextrose (yellow-top) tubes and overnight shipment of chilled tubes to the laboratory.  Tissue samples for genetic analysis should be unfixed and shipped immediately after collection. As with most molecular techniques, aseptic collection and the prevention of cross contamination between samples is critical for reliable test results.  Key Points Overview of Diagnostic Procedures for the Private Practice Laboratory ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Sept 2024 Numerous laboratory tests can be done in a private practice laboratory. Use of a commercial laboratory versus in-house testing should be evaluated to determine whether in-house testing is practical and economical. Because the availability of diagnostic laboratories and their reporting intervals may be problematic (eg, nights and holidays), performing some diagnostic screening tests in-house is often desirable. However, because the people performing these tests often have minimal technical training, quality control procedures must be rigorous. The time and care that must be devoted to quality control issues may preclude in-house testing in many practices. Errors may occur not only in testing procedures but also in sample collection and handling and in recording results.  Tests can be done using either manual or automated methods. Manual methods tend to be time consuming and are more subject to human error. Automated and semiautomated systems are available but are more expensive. Factors to be considered include instrument and reagent costs (including materials for calibration and quality control), availability of personnel training, technical support, and instrument maintenance and service. Although service contracts can cost up to 10% of the purchase price of an instrument, they are often cost-effective because of the expense of instrument repair Clinical Biochemistry ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Sept 2024 Basic Test Panel: | Additional Tests: | Tests for Pancreatic Disease: | Handling of Samples: | Point-of-Care Tests: | The Practice Laboratory: Clinical biochemistry refers to the analysis of the blood plasma (or serum) for a wide variety of substances—substrates, enzymes, hormones, etc—and their use in diagnosis and monitoring of disease. Analysis of other body fluids (eg, urine, ascitic fluids, CSF) is also included. One test is very seldom specific to one clinical condition, and basic checklists of factors affecting the most commonly requested analytes are given below. Thus, rather than six tests that merely confirm or deny six possibilities, a well-chosen group of six tests can provide information pointing to a wide variety of different conditions by a process of pattern recognition. Biochemistry tests should be accompanied by full hematology, because evaluation of both together is essential for optimal recognition of many of the most characteristic disease patterns ( see Clinical Hematology).  Before samples are collected, a list of differential diagnoses should already be established based on the history and clinical examination. Then, additional appropriate tests can be added to the basic panel below.  Making a diagnosis entails establishing a list of differential diagnoses based on the history and clinical examination. Based on this list, tests can be selected to include or exclude as many of the differentials as possible. Yet more tests may be necessary until only one of the original list remains to determine the diagnosis. If all differentials are excluded, then the list must be reevaluated. It is not good practice to order tests without a sensible differential list unless the animal presents without definitive clinical signs.  Basic Test Panel: Most veterinary laboratories offer a basic panel of tests, which represents a minimal investigation applicable to most general situations. For small animals, a typical panel includes total protein, albumin, globulin (calculated as the difference between the first two analytes), urea, creatinine, ALT, and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). In addition, a yellow color seen in the plasma should be considered an indication to measure bilirubin. This panel may be modified as appropriate for other species, eg, glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) and/or gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT) are more appropriate “liver enzymes” for horses and farm animals, or it may be more appropriate to concentrate primarily on muscle enzymes (CK and AST) in athletic animals.  Total protein level increases due to dehydration, chronic inflammation, and paraproteinemia. It decreases due to overhydration, severe congestive heart failure (with edema), protein-losing nephropathy, protein-losing enteropathy, hemorrhage, burns, dietary protein deficiency, malabsorption, and some viral conditions (especially in horses).  Albumin level increases due to dehydration. It decreases due to the same factors as total protein, plus liver failure.  Urea level increases due to excess dietary protein, poor quality dietary protein, carbohydrate deficiency, catabolic states, dehydration, congestive heart failure, renal failure, blocked urethra, and ruptured bladder. It decreases due to low dietary protein, gross sepsis, anabolic hormonal effects, liver failure, portosystemic shunts (congenital or acquired), and inborn errors of urea cycle metabolism. Urea measurement is used especially to indicate renal disease and to a lesser extent liver dysfunction.  Creatinine level increases due to renal dysfunction, blocked urethra, and ruptured bladder. It decreases due to sample deterioration. Animals with a high muscle mass have high-normal creatinine concentrations, whereas animals with a low muscle mass have low-normal creatinine concentrations. Creatinine measurement is used especially for renal disease.  ALT is present in the cytoplasm and mitochondria of liver cells and, therefore, increases due to hepatocellular damage. It has a half life of 2–4 hr and rises higher than AST but recovers quicker. There are minor increases with muscle damage and hyperthyroidism.  ALP level increases due to increased bone deposition, liver damage, hyperthyroidism, biliary tract disease, intestinal damage, hyperadrenocorticism, corticosteroid administration, barbiturate administration, and generalized tissue damage (including neoplasia). The most common causes for an increase is raised levels of circulating steroids and biliary disease. The half-life is 72 hr in dogs but only 6 hr in cats. Levels in the cat are generally much lower than in the dog, and any increase in cats is considered significant. In dogs, ALP levels in the thousands of units are usually associated with increased steroid levels. ALP and ALT levels rarely rise above 1,000 units, even in severe liver disease.  GDH level increases in hepatocellular damage, particularly hepatic necrosis, in horses and ruminants.  GGT increases in longer-term liver damage; it is particularly useful in horses and ruminants.  CK, the classic “muscle enzyme,” increases markedly in rhabdomyolysis and aortic thromboembolism. Slight level increases are reported in hypothyroidism. Only a very small amount of muscle damage such as bruising or IM injections can result in high serum CK levels. In dogs and cats, unless investigating specific muscle disease, increased levels are generally of no clinical significance.  AST level increases in both muscle and liver damage but is of less value than ALT. The half-life is 5 hr in dogs and 77 min in cats. It is also reported to increase in hypothyroidism.  Most of the above parameters are associated with liver function/dysfunction and are frequently overinterpreted. In small animals, increases in ALT and ALP levels can reach four times normal and still be associated only with fatty change, a nonspecific finding and not, in most cases, a primary liver problem. Some laboratories also frequently receive liver biopsies from dogs that have significant increases in liver enzymes and bile acids >80 but that have normal histologic morphology. The reason for this is unknown.  In general, plasma enzyme levels decrease due to sample deterioration. Uncommonly, atrophy or fibrosis of an organ may result in unusually low plasma activities of the relevant enzymes.  Additional Tests: Further tests may be added to the basic panel, according to the principal presenting signs, to create panels for polydipsic animals, collapsing animals, etc. These panels are structured so that the patterns of abnormalities typical of all the likely differential diagnoses applicable to the situation can be discerned. For example, a polydipsia panel may add calcium, glucose, and cholesterol. Calcium allows recognition of hyperparathyroidism and other causes of hypercalcemia (which causes polydipsia and renal insufficiency), glucose may indicate diabetes mellitus and contributes to the pattern characteristic of hyperadrenocorticism, and cholesterol also adds to the appreciation of the “Cushing pattern.” Renal failure is covered by the tests already included in the basic panel. In contrast, in a panel for a "collapsing animal,” calcium and glucose may be added to screen for hypocalcemia or hypoglycemia. Sodium and potassium are included to screen for hypoadrenocorticism or hypokalemia. Analytes that might be considered for incorporation in such expanded profiles are described below.  Sodium level increases due to Conn syndrome (hyperaldosteronism), restricted water intake, vomiting, and most causes of dehydration. It decreases due to hypoadrenocorticism, loss of any high-sodium fluid such as some forms of renal disease, and insufficient sodium provision during IV fluid therapy.  Potassium level increases due to hypoadrenocorticism and severe renal failure (especially terminal cases). It decreases due to Conn syndrome, chronic renal dysfunction, vomiting, diarrhea, and insufficient potassium provision during IV fluid therapy. Congenital hypokalemia occurs in Burmese cats.  Chloride level increases in acidosis, and in parallel with increases in sodium concentration. It decreases in alkalosis, vomiting (especially after eating), and in association with hyponatremia.  Total CO2 (bicarbonate) level increases in metabolic alkalosis and decreases in metabolic acidosis. It is less useful to assess respiratory acid/base disturbances.  Calcium level increases due to dehydration (which is also associated with increased albumin), primary hyperparathyroidism (neoplasia of parathyroid gland), primary pseudohyperparathyroidism (neoplasms producing parathormone-related peptide [PRP], usually perianal adenocarcinoma or some form of lymphosarcoma), bone invasion of malignant neoplasms, thyrotoxicosis (uncommon), and overtreatment of parturient paresis. It decreases due to hypoalbuminemia, parturient paresis, oxalate poisoning, chronic renal failure (secondary renal hyperparathyroidism), acute pancreatitis (occasionally), surgical interference with parathyroid glands, and idiopathic (autoimmune) hypoparathyroidism.  Phosphate level increases due to renal failure (secondary renal hyperparathyroidism). Decreases are seen in some downer cows and as part of the stress pattern in horses and small animals.  Magnesium level increases are rarely seen, including during acute renal failure. It decreases in ruminants due to dietary deficiency, either acute (grass staggers) or chronic, and diarrhea (uncommon).  Glucose level increases due to high-carbohydrate meals, sprint exercise, stress or excitement (including handling and sampling stress), glucocorticoid therapy, hyperadrenocorticism, overinfusion with glucose/dextrose-containing IV fluids, and diabetes mellitus. It decreases due to insulin overdose, insulinoma, islet cell hyperplasia (uncommon), acetonemia/pregnancy toxemia, acute febrile illness, and idiopathically (in certain dog breeds).  β-Hydroxybutyrate level increases in diabetes mellitus. It is a major component of ketoacidosis and as such is also increased in acetonemia/pregnancy toxemia and extreme starvation. It can be measured in both blood and urine.  Bilirubin level increases due to fasting (benign effect in horses and squirrel monkeys, may be caused by hepatic lipidosis in cats), hemolytic disease (usually mild increase), liver dysfunction, and biliary obstruction (intra- or extrahepatic). Theoretically, hemolysis is characterized by an increase in unconjugated (indirect) bilirubin, whereas hepatic and post-hepatic disorders are characterized by an increase in conjugated (direct) bilirubin; however, in practice this differentiation is unsatisfactory. Better appreciation of the source of the jaundice is gained from bile acid measurements.  Bile acid levels increase when hepatic anion transport is impaired, usually during liver dysfunction (bile acids are more sensitive than bilirubin to hepatic impairment) and in the presence of a portosystemic shunt (congenital or acquired). The latter condition is characterized by a marked increase in bile acid concentration after feeding, from a fasting concentration that may be normal. It also increases in bile duct obstruction; very little increase is seen in feline infectious peritonitis or mild cases of hepatic lipidosis. Very high levels can sometimes be seen without structural histologic changes. The reason for this is not known.  Cholesterol level increases due to fatty meals, hepatic or biliary disease, protein-losing nephropathy (and other protein-losing syndromes to some extent), diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocorticism, and hypothyroidism. It decreases in some cases of severe liver dysfunction and occasionally in hyperthyroidism.  Lactate dehydrogenase is a ubiquitous enzyme with a number of isoenzymes; electrophoretic separation of isoenzymes is necessary to locate the source of increased activity. It is therefore of very limited value in general clinical practice.  Sorbitol dehydrogenase level increases in acute hepatocellular damage in horses but is a very labile analyte.  α-Amylase level increases in acute pancreatitis but in dogs is also increased in chronic renal dysfunction. It is therefore of limited use in the diagnosis of pancreatitis. Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity is now the test of choice for diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and cats. Amylase is not a useful indicator of pancreatitis in cats.  Lipase level increases in acute pancreatitis in dogs (longer half-life than amylase) and also occasionally in chronic renal dysfunction. Lipase (routine assay) is not a useful indicator of pancreatitis in cats.  Immunoreactive trypsin (trypsin-like immunoreactivity) level decreases in exocrine pancreatic insufficiency in dogs. It will also increase (irregularly) in pancreatitis.  Tests for Pancreatic Disease: Pancreatitis: Serum amylase and lipase activities have been used for several decades to diagnose pancreatitis in both people and dogs. Unfortunately, neither of these tests is both sensitive and specific for pancreatitis in dogs. In one study, significant serum amylase and lipase activities remained after total pancreatectomy, indicating there are sources of serum amylase and lipase activity other than the exocrine pancreas. Also, clinical data suggest a specificity for pancreatitis of only ~50% for both of these markers. Many nonpancreatic diseases, such as renal, hepatic, intestinal, and neoplastic diseases, can lead to increases in serum amylase and lipase activities. Steroid administration can also increase serum lipase activity and cause variable responses in serum amylase activity. Thus, in dogs, measurement of serum amylase and lipase activities are of limited usefulness for diagnosis of pancreatitis. Serum amylase and/or lipase activities that are 3–5 times the upper limit of the reference range, in animals with clinical signs consistent with pancreatitis, are suggestive of such a diagnosis. However, it is important to note that ~50% of dogs that fulfill these criteria do not have pancreatitis. In cats, serum amylase and lipase activities are of no clinical value for diagnosis of pancreatitis. Although cats with experimental pancreatitis can show an increase in serum lipase activity and a decrease in serum amylase activity, these changes are not consistent in cats with spontaneous pancreatitis. In one study of 12 cats with severe forms of pancreatitis, not a single cat had serum lipase or amylase activity above the upper limit of the reference range.  Serum trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) concentration measures mainly trypsinogen, the only form of trypsin circulating in the vascular space of healthy individuals. However, trypsin, if present in the serum, is also detected by these assays. Serum TLI concentrations can be measured by species-specific assays that have been developed and validated for both dogs and cats. In healthy animals, serum TLI is low, but during pancreatitis an increased amount of trypsinogen leaks into the vascular space, which can lead to an increase in serum TLI concentration. Trypsin that has been prematurely activated may also contribute to this increase. However, both trypsinogen and trypsin are quickly cleared by the kidneys. In addition, any prematurely activated trypsin is quickly removed by proteinase inhibitors, such as α1-proteinase inhibitor and α2-macroglobulin. In turn, α2-macroglobulin-trypsin complexes are removed by the reticuloendothelial system. Thus, the serum half-life for TLI is short, and a significant degree of active inflammation is required to increase serum TLI concentration. Because of the limited sensitivity of serum cTLI and fTLI concentrations for canine and feline pancreatitis, respectively, and because only a limited number of laboratories measure these assays routinely, serum TLI concentration is of limited usefulness for diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and cats.  Pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity (PLI) concentration measures the concentration of classical pancreatic lipase in the serum. This is in contrast to serum lipase activity, which measures the enzymatic activity of all triglyceridases present in the serum, regardless of their cellular origin. Assays to measure PLI in canine (cPLI) and feline (fPLI) serum have been developed and validated and are commercially available. Serum PLI is highly specific for exocrine pancreatic function. Also, serum PLI is far more sensitive for diagnosis of pancreatitis than any other diagnostic test currently available.  A patient-side semiquantitative assay for diagnosis of canine pancreatitis is also available. A test spot that is lighter in color than the reference spot suggests that pancreatitis can be excluded. A test spot darker in color than the reference spot raises the suspicion of pancreatitis and should prompt the clinician to measure a serum cPLI concentration in the laboratory.  Other tests for diagnosis of pancreatitis in dogs and cats have been evaluated, including plasma trypsinogen activation peptide (TAP) concentration, urine TAP concentration, urine TAP:creatinine ratio, serum α1-proteinase inhibitor trypsin complex concentration, and serum α2-macroglobulin concentration. However, none has been shown to be of clinical usefulness.  Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency: In the past, several fecal tests have been used to diagnose exocrine pancreatic insufficiency (EPI). Microscopic fecal examination for fat and/or undigested starch or muscle fibers are at best useful to suggest maldigestion. However, in light of wide availability of tests to diagnose EPI, microscopic fecal examination is no longer justified. Fecal proteolytic activity had been used to diagnose EPI in small animals for several decades. Most of these methods, particularly the radiographic film clearance test, are unreliable. One method, which uses pre-made tablets to pour a gelatin agar, is considered most reliable. However, false-positive as well as false-negative results have been reported. The clinical use of fecal proteolytic activity is limited to species for which more specific assays to estimate pancreatic function are not available and in areas where the more accurate and sophisticated tests are not available.  Serum TLI concentration is the diagnostic test of choice for EPI in both dogs and cats. Assays for TLI measure trypsinogen circulating in the vascular space. In healthy animals, only a small amount of trypsinogen is present in serum. However, in dogs and cats with EPI, the number of pancreatic acinar cells is severely decreased. Serum TLI concentration decreases significantly and may even be undetectable. The reference range for TLI in dogs is 5.7–45.2 mcg/L with a cut-off value of ≤2.5 mcg/L considered diagnostic for EPI. Similarly, the reference range for TLI in cats is 12–82 mcg/L, with a cut-off value of ≤8 mcg/L considered diagnostic. Rarely, animals with serum TLI concentrations below the cut-off value for EPI do not have clinical signs of EPI. This is probably because of the functional redundancy of the GI tract. At the same time, many dogs and cats with chronic diarrhea and weight loss have mild decreases in serum TLI concentration. Most of these animals have chronic small-intestinal disease and should be investigated accordingly. However, a small number of these dogs and cats may have EPI. If there is no evidence of small-intestinal disease in such patients, a trial therapy with pancreatic enzymes and reevaluation of serum TLI concentration after 1 mo is indicated.  PLI is also highly specific for exocrine pancreatic function and could be used to diagnose EPI. However, initial studies showed there is a small degree of overlap in serum PLI concentrations between healthy dogs and dogs with EPI, making the measurement of PLI slightly inferior to that of TLI for accurate diagnosis. In view of these findings, PLI assays for both dogs and cats have been optimized toward higher concentrations, and the current assays are no longer suitable for diagnosis of EPI in dogs or cats.  A fecal canine elastase concentration assay has been developed and validated but is inferior to the widely used TLI measurement.  Handling of Samples: Most biochemistry tests can be performed on either serum or heparinized plasma. A few (eg, insulin) require serum, whereas potassium is best measured on heparin plasma separated immediately after collection. Glucose measurement requires fluoride/oxalate plasma. Suitable collection tubes with and without anticoagulant are available commercially. Plastic tubes are satisfactory for blood in anticoagulant, but clotted blood must be collected either into glass tubes or plastic tubes specially coated to prevent the clot from adhering to the vessel walls.  Samples for biochemical analysis should be separated as soon as possible after collection to minimize artifacts caused by hemolysis and leakage of intracellular fluid components (eg, potassium) out of the cells. Samples in anticoagulant may be centrifuged immediately, but clotted samples need at least 30 min to allow the clot to form. Fluoride/oxalate samples hemolyze very readily because the cells can no longer respire, so timely separation is especially important. Proprietary gels or plastic beads assist with separation, and these may be incorporated into the collection tube or added before centrifugation.  Larger bucket-type centrifuges will accept almost any type or size of tube, but the rotors require careful balancing. They should be spun at 3,000 rpm for 10 min. Dual-purpose, high-speed microhematocrit centrifuges are favored for in-practice use, because they separate samples more quickly and the same machine can be used to measure PCV. However, they can handle only a limited range of small-volume tubes.  Some “gel-tube” products may provide a permanent separation of serum or plasma; otherwise, this must be separated into a fresh tube. The new tube must be adequately labeled. Samples may then be sent to a professional laboratory or analyzed in the practice.  Point-of-Care Tests: A number of biochemical analytes may be estimated in the practice without the need for large analytical instruments.  Total protein level is measured by refractometry, using the same instrument as is used to measure urine specific gravity, provided the instrument has a total protein scale. It is also valid for protein measurement of ascitic and pleural fluids. The readout may be in g/dL, in which case multiplying the result by 10 will yield the SI unit of g/L.  Urea level may be estimated by chromatographic reaction strips, which correlate well with standard laboratory methods. A rapid whole-blood color comparison strip is also available, but these read only up to ~20 mmol/L and are thus of limited use. A dedicated reflectance meter for urea estimation is not available.  Glucose meters for use on whole blood are widely available for home use by human diabetic patients. These yield acceptably accurate results on animal blood, although an unexpected hypoglycemia should be confirmed by a professional laboratory. Fresh whole blood may be used, but fluoride blood or plasma is the preferred sample if analysis is not immediate.  Ketone levels may be estimated on either urine (preferred sample) or plasma/serum. This can be achieved by using the ketone patch of a urine dipstick, giving a qualitative result. However, there are a number of point-of-care instruments for measurement of blood glucose and ketone levels, including specifically β-hydroxybutyrate.  Triglyceride levels may be visualized in a plasma or serum sample as lipemia. If the milkiness rises to the top of the tube on storage, chylomicrons are present. Otherwise, the milkiness is caused by triglycerides. This is a qualitative judgment but is nevertheless useful, especially in equine patients.  Bilirubin level may also be appreciated by eye in most species. Equine and bovine plasma is normally yellow, which makes determination problematic, but in other species, any yellow color is abnormal and indicates an increased bilirubin level. Visual assessment of the depth and shade of color may provide additional information.  Other point-of-care tests include C-reactive protein as a marker for inflammation and cardiac troponin as a marker for cardiac muscle damage.  For emergency in-clinic use, the most important analytes beyond these simple basics are sodium and potassium. A dedicated ion-specific electrode meter is the best way to measure these. Instruments are available that can analyze whole blood, although great care must be taken to avoid artifacts due to unappreciated hemolysis. Critical care meters are also available that can estimate a variety of analytes, including glucose, urea, and electrolytes; however, these have not been extensively validated on nonhuman blood, and results should be interpreted with caution.  The Practice Laboratory: Extending in-practice analysis beyond these emergency basics requires a dedicated instrument capable of measuring multiple analytes. Two types are available—those based on transmission/absorbance photometry (wet chemistry) and those based on reflectance photometry (dry-reagent chemistry). Transmission/absorbance photometry is the reference method on which all reference values and interpretive guidelines are based. Reflectance photometry methods do not always compare well with the reference method and are best confined to simpler tests such as glucose and urea. For wider applications, such as enzyme analysis, wet chemistry instruments are preferred.  In-clinic analysis is inevitably more expensive than the same investigations done by a professional laboratory, and the range of analytes available is more restricted. Additionally, the level of accuracy or reliability is likely to be lower. Therefore, it is still best practice to regard in-practice analysis as an interim emergency investigation, with the results to be confirmed as appropriate by a professional laboratory. Detailed case laboratory evaluation of nonemergency patients is best referred to a professional laboratory from the outset, for reasons of cost, accuracy, range of analytes available, and the assistance of the clinical pathologist in interpretation of the results.  If in-clinic analysis is to be relied on for general case laboratory evaluation, meticulous attention must be paid to quality assurance. Samples of known composition must be run at least daily for each analyte, in both normal and pathologic ranges; unless these are within the tolerance limits, no patient samples should be tested. Participation in an external quality assessment program is also strongly recommended. Employing a trained technician will address some of these issues but has implications for availability of results during off hours and holidays. The veterinarian in charge of the laboratory is responsible for all the results issued and incurs a legal liability to prove accuracy and reliability. If these cannot be guaranteed to the same standard as a referral laboratory, then results should not be relied on without external confirmation. Cytology ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Jun 2025 Techniques | Staining: | Fine-needle Aspiration: | Impression Smears: | Body Fluid Evaluation: | Interpretation of Cytology Samples | Inflammation: | Neoplasia: | Tumor Evaluation: | Common Cytology Results: | Cytology of Specific Sites: Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (9) Tables (1) Videos (0) Cytology is a useful clinical tool for investigation of disease processes, and the techniques and their interpretation have developed into an entire discipline. This discussion is a brief guide to enable practitioners to prepare samples and undertake basic interpretation; it refers mostly to small animals, but the basic principles apply to all species.  Cytology should be considered a guide. Characteristics of the cells may not be sufficient in many instances to yield a definitive diagnosis or indicate the probable behavior of the lesion. These may require examination of the overall architecture of the tissue, for which cytology is not appropriate. If complex, expensive, or life-threatening therapy is being considered, then the diagnosis should if possible be confirmed by histology.  Techniques Full cytologic interpretation requires a good quality sample. A substantial minority of samples collected by practitioners are unsuitable for full interpretation. The technique appears to be simple, but consistently obtaining good-quality samples requires practice. If samples are sent to a laboratory for interpretation, sending more than one is recommended. In addition, staining and examining one of the preparations in-house helps to monitor the quality of the samples taken and make a provisional diagnosis. This requires a good staining technique and a good quality microscope with a range of objectives, including oil immersion.  Staining: The stains and techniques used for cytology preparations in a practice setting are the same as those used for hematology preparations. The traditional stains for cytology preparations are modified Wright stain (Wright-Giemsa) and May-Grunwald Giemsa. Over the past few years, good-quality rapid Romanowsky stains have been developed for cytology and hematology and are often used by veterinary diagnostic laboratories. Many different brands of rapid stain have been developed, so trying a number of products to see which stain is best suited to a practice is recommended. Poor preparations are not always the fault of the collection technique; the stain may be the problem. Stains deteriorate with use and require regular renewal. Many slides can be adjusted by returning a finished stained slide to the stain for deeper color reaction, or if overstained, can have some color removed by placing the slide in alcohol. Formalin-fixed cytology preparations must be stained with either H&E or Papanicolaou stain. If samples are sent to a laboratory for interpretation, the submission form should indicate whether formalin has been added.  Fine-needle Aspiration: The aim of fine-needle aspiration is to obtain a high cell harvest with minimal artifactual damage or blood contamination. The basic sampling kit consists of 21- and 25-gauge needles and 3-, 5-, and 10-mL syringes. Precise technique and choice of equipment depends on physical characteristics of the lesion and whether blood contamination is a problem.  The basic technique uses a 25-gauge needle and a 10-mL syringe. The needle is inserted into the lesion and repeatedly redirected to sample a number of areas while applying a small amount of suction on the syringe. Suction is released before withdrawing the needle. If suction is continued on withdrawal, the cell sample is violently sucked into the barrel of the syringe, causing cell rupture. Sample size is often very small and may be present only within the lumen of the needle and not in the syringe. When the sample has been obtained, the syringe is removed, filled with air, reattached, and used to gently express the sample onto a clean, dry, glass slide. Expressing the sample forcefully will rupture cells. Another slide is placed on top of the sample and pulled lengthways to spread the sample to a monolayer. Additional pressure should not be applied, because this also may cause rupture of the cells. Thicker areas are not a concern; the edges will often be thin enough to examine individual, nonoverlapping cells. The sample should be air dried as quickly as possible to reduce the effects of shrinkage; a hair dryer can be used for this purpose, but heating the sample must be avoided.  This technique can be adapted to different situations. If blood contamination is a problem, the size of the syringe and amount of suction can be reduced or the syringe removed altogether. This is particularly a problem with bone marrow aspiration but is common with all cytology samples and is thought to be due to excessive suction on the syringe. If blood contamination is unavoidable, the blood can be centrifuged. However, if the sample is directly smeared, a feathered edge should be examined, because this is where the heavier cells from the tissue tend to congregate. Blood contamination can often be decreased with the use of a very fine needle (25 gauge); this increases the chance of collecting enough cells for interpretation.  An alternative technique uses a needle without a syringe; no difference in the cell harvest between these two techniques has been shown. The needle is inserted without the syringe and repeatedly redirected to sample different depths and directions within the lesion. The cells are detached by the cutting edge of the needle and enter the needle lumen by capillary action. After withdrawal of the needle, a syringe containing air is reattached and used to gently express the sample. This technique is also particularly useful to sample fragile cells, such as lymphoid cells from lymph nodes. A far better cell harvest is obtained from splenic lesions with this technique than by applying suction. In addition, there is greater sensitivity in placement of the needle, which is especially useful for small lesions.  Certain tissues tend to give a very low cell harvest. These are usually composed of mesenchymal cells (connective tissue) that tightly adhere to each other and therefore do not exfoliate easily. For these lesions, a larger bore needle and increased suction may be necessary. However, a needle with a bore >21 gauge tends to provide a tissue core more suitable for histologic interpretation than cytology.  Impression Smears: Impression smears are often used for ulcerated surface lesions. They are of limited value, because they usually sample only the surface inflammatory exudate and rarely include cells from deeper tissues. A better use of this technique is at the time of biopsy to allow an immediate assessment of the lesion before fixation and processing of the tissue sample. The cut surface of the excised sample is blotted a number of times to remove surface blood and serum, and the dried surface is applied to a clean, dry slide with gentle pressure. A number of areas can be prepared on a single slide. The preparations should be quickly air dried and then stained.  Body Fluid Evaluation: Once a body fluid (eg, urine, pleural or peritoneal fluid) is obtained, a cytospin preparation is by far the best method of cell concentration. However, few practices have access to a cytospin, so centrifugation of the preparation and sampling of the centrifuged sediment is the usual method of cell concentration. Once the slide has been prepared, it should be rapidly air dried before staining.  If the fluid is to be sent to a laboratory, adding a few drops of formalin (the concentration is not critical) helps preserve cells and prevent bacterial overgrowth during transit. Severe bacterial overgrowth obscures the cells, and their metabolic products tend to destroy cells in cytology preparations. This is particularly useful for bronchoalveolar lavage samples and urine, which often contain infectious agents and are prone to bacterial contamination at sampling. The laboratory must be advised of the presence of formalin, which excludes the use of Romanowsky stains. Adding EDTA to help preserve cytology samples is often recommended, but the effect is minimal.  Cells in CSF samples degenerate very quickly and are usually present in very low numbers. Cytospin preparations are almost essential for CSF examination; this can usually be achieved only in a reference laboratory. The addition of a few drops of 10% formalin preserves the cells in CSF very well during transit.  Interpretation of Cytology Samples Cytology interpretation can be guided by an algorithm that also covers the common questions asked by clinicians. From a clinical viewpoint, it is often not necessary to complete all stages of this algorithm. For example, a simple differentiation of inflammation from neoplasia may be sufficient to allow a decision on the next stage of case management. Full cytology interpretation may require the services of a diagnostic laboratory, and a definitive diagnosis often requires histopathology. Some lesions cannot be definitively diagnosed by cytology. If in doubt or if the cytologic interpretation does not correlate with the clinical picture, histology is essential for full interpretation. Whenever the diagnosis is in doubt, biopsy is indicated.  Cytology algorithm   Cytology algorithm Algorithm to interpret cytology samples.  Inflammation: Recognition of basic inflammatory cells—neutrophils, eosinophils, lymphocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells—is essential for interpretation of cytology samples. Some tumors contain a large number of inflammatory cells, but these are very uncommon, even when there is tumor necrosis. The presence of only inflammatory cells in a sample usually indicates a primary inflammatory lesion. Ulceration produces inflammation on the surface of neoplastic lesions, but even in this case the inflammatory cells typically do not extend deeply into the underlying neoplasm. A small percentage of mast cell tumors, however, are composed almost entirely of inflammation, hemorrhage, and edema with only a small number of mast cells. These can be difficult to identify even by histology.  Neutrophils: These are the first cells to arrive in an area of inflammation, and they continue to be attracted to the site as long as the inflammatory stimulus lasts. Large numbers of neutrophils indicate acute inflammation and often are accompanied by smaller numbers of macrophages. This pattern is most often caused by infection or foreign body reaction, including furunculotic reactions directed against hair and keratin embedded in the soft tissue. If fluids are not examined immediately, bacteria, if present, will begin to proliferate, but phagocytosis of bacteria does not occur after sampling. Therefore, if the bacteria are truly pathogenic, they should be within the cytoplasm of the phagocytic cells. The cells’ cytoplasm may contain RBCs, tissue debris, or foreign material.  Macrophages: Macrophages arrive at a site of inflammation within 2–3 hr and are not necessarily an indicator of chronicity, although they often increase with time. They phagocytize bacteria and also larger structures, such as fungi, cellular debris, and foreign material. These cells are often associated with tissue destruction.  Macrophages come from circulating monocytes and have variable morphology. In the tissue, the cytoplasm greatly enlarges over time and usually becomes vacuolated. The nuclei become rounded. If a macrophage exhibits vacuolation or phagocytosis, it is often described as activated. They can be multinucleated, especially with foreign body reactions and in longstanding lesions. Under certain circumstances, they may become epithelioid. These cells have oval or round nuclei and small, often indistinct, nucleoli. Their cytoplasm is expanded but uniformly stained and not vacuolated. They can look epithelial, and great care must be taken when interpreting such cells. However, they do not normally form clusters, which is a key factor in differentiation from epithelial cells.  Macrophages are almost always seen in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (they come from the alveoli) and body cavity fluids (part of the modification process), joints (a normal component but increased in disease), and cyst contents (a nonspecific reaction).  Eosinophils: Eosinophils have segmented nuclei and eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules. They vary slightly between species and are generally slightly larger than neutrophils. In cytology preparations, it can occasionally be difficult to distinguish poorly stained eosinophils from neutrophils, because the granules can become indistinct and the cytoplasm of degenerating neutrophils become more acidic, giving a more eosinophilic staining reaction. They are often seen in association with mast cells. Eosinophils are associated with allergies and also are prominent in parasitic diseases, superficial cutaneous viral infection in cats, and fungal infections. They are the predominant cell type in specific eosinophilic conditions such as eosinophilic granuloma in cats (rarely in dogs), canine eosinophilic folliculitis and furunculosis, and eosinophilic collagenolytic granuloma in horses. Some cases of canine cutaneous mast cell tumors have a very high proportion of eosinophils and very few mast cells (<5% of cases).  Of the most commonly encountered veterinary species, rabbits and guinea pigs have inflammatory cells equivalent to neutrophils in other species, but have eosinophilic cytoplasmic granules. These are called heterophils. They can be difficult to distinguish from eosinophils. The cellular equivalent to neutrophils in birds and reptiles are also heterophils with eosinophilic granules.  Lymphocytes: Lymphocytes are usually small with very little cytoplasm and smudged chromatin with no nucleoli. The almost-round nuclei are similar in size to those of red cells. RBCs are often present in cytology preparations, where they can be used as a comparative and absolute scale. RBCs vary slightly with species; in dogs, RBCs are ~7 microns in diameter. Medium and large lymphocytes, which have a slightly more open chromatin pattern and more cytoplasm, can also be seen in inflammatory processes. Along with plasma cells, lymphocytes are part of the chronic inflammatory response and tend to arrive in tissue a few days after the acute inflammation has begun. However, they are not specific for a particular stimulus and are mostly small lymphocytes. If mostly medium to large cells are present, lymphoma is a possibility. However, even large lymphoblastic cells can be seen in low numbers in inflammatory processes. Normal and reactive lymphocytes in body fluids often appear larger than the same cells from soft tissue.  Multinucleated Cells: These cells are large and have larger numbers of nuclei with one to three small nucleoli and vacuolated cytoplasm. They develop from macrophages (see above) and tend to appear late in the course of inflammation. The cytoplasm should be examined for the presence of fungal organisms and for foreign material. These cells are usually seen in small numbers mixed with other inflammatory cells as part of a granulomatous reaction. Multinucleated cells are much less specific in birds and reptiles, in which they are common in many focal inflammatory lesions, irrespective of cause, and can appear quite early in the inflammatory process.  Fibroblasts: Fibroblasts are not inflammatory cells, but they are frequently seen in association with inflammation. They will proliferate as part of the repair reaction associated with any tissue damage and appear in an inflammatory lesion after ~2 days. Classically, fibroblasts and fibrocytes are elongated cells with pointed tails of cytoplasm. They have round or oval nuclei, indistinct nucleoli, and moderate amounts of uniform, pale blue-staining cytoplasm. The cytoplasmic boundaries are indistinct, giving a “wispy” appearance. When fibroblasts are aspirated from tissue, the cells often become round and lose their spindle shape, but a small number, especially cells in groups, retain their elongated shape. Reactive fibroblasts cannot be definitively distinguished cytologically from low-grade spindle cell tumors. If found in association with inflammatory cells, spindle cells are most often reactive. If found in large clumps with no apparent stimulus, they are more often neoplastic (but neoplasia cannot be excluded). Because fibroblasts and fibrocytes are the principal connective tissue cell, they are tightly adherent to each other, and cell harvest tends to be low.  Neoplasia: Inflammatory lesions are characterized by cells from different populations. The presence of cells that are predominantly of the same population indicates normal tissue, hyperplasia, or neoplasia. Ideally, the first stage in evaluation of a cytologic sample for neoplasia is to determine the tissue type from which the cells have come. If this is not possible, it is necessary to simply determine the likely behavior of the cells. This can often be done without specifically identifying the cell type. The following checklist includes features that can be examined to determine tissue type and likely behavior of the lesion: 1) cell numbers, 2) cell distribution within the smear, 3) cell shape, 4) nucleus:cytoplasm ratio, 5) pleomorphism (both nuclear and cytoplasmic), 6) number, shape, and size of nucleoli, and 7) cytoplasmic content such as melanin, metachromatic granules, fat, etc. Classification of the cell type and likely behavior may require a tissue biopsy. With few exceptions, histology will be necessary for a definitive diagnosis and is always necessary to assess mitotic index and to grade a tumor.  There are three basic tissue types: epithelial, mesenchymal (supporting or connective tissue), and round cells.  Epithelial Cells: Mammary carcinoma, dog   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Epithelial cells are round, cuboidal, or polygonal and tend to adhere tightly to each other and exfoliate in clusters or sheets. They have a sharp cytoplasmic outline and exfoliate in moderate numbers. Cells with more than one nucleus are uncommon.  Mesenchymal Cells: Mesenchymal, or spindle, cells   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Mesenchymal cells are tightly adherent and usually exfoliate in low numbers as single cells or small aggregates. They are classically spindle shaped but usually round up and become plump when removed from the body, particularly when they are lying singly within the smear. The spindle shape is often more apparent in small aggregates. They tend to appear “wispy” because of indistinct cytoplasmic boundaries. Binucleate cells are not uncommon.  Round Cells: Round cells (plasmacytoma)   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Round cells have little or no adherence in the body. They typically exfoliate in large numbers and lie individually in the smear without clumping. Cells of this category include mast cells, lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasma cells, and cells of transmissible venereal tumors.  Tumor Evaluation: To distinguish benign from malignant tumors, the amount of variation in certain characteristics within the cell population must be assessed. In general, the more malignant the cell, the less differentiated it becomes and the more variation there is in the cell morphology. Benign tumors have cells that are often uniform in size with a uniform nucleus:cytoplasm ratio; they strongly resemble or are identical to the cell of origin. The more malignant the cells become, the more variation is seen in these criteria. Nuclear criteria are the major indicators of malignancy.  Criteria for malignancy include the following: variation in cell size and shape, increased cell exfoliation, increased nuclear size, increased nucleus:cytoplasm ratio, variation in nuclear size and an increase in multinucleated cells, increased mitosis with abnormal mitotic figures, a coarse and often clumped chromatin pattern, altered shape of the nucleus due to close approximation of a nucleus from an adjacent cell (nuclear moulding), and large and often multiple nucleoli of irregular and abnormal shape. There are a number of exceptions to these indicators; in such situations, histology is essential for full interpretation.  The following are some exceptions to the rules of interpretation:  Thyroid carcinomas usually have fairly uniform, well-differentiated cells. A diagnosis of carcinoma can be made simply on the size of the mass in dogs (tumors >3 cm are automatically considered malignant) but not in cats. Major features of malignancy, such as capsular, soft-tissue invasion and vessel invasion, can only be identified histologically. Other tissues in which it may be impossible to differentiate benign from malignant cells include apocrine gland carcinomas, basal cell tumors, melanomas, and proliferative lesions of the liver.  Unlike most malignant tumors, lymphoma is commonly characterized by a uniform population of cells that are larger than normal lymphoid cells. Therefore, variation in morphology is not necessary for a diagnosis of malignancy with this tissue type. If there is marked variation and small lymphocytes are present, then that is more typical of hyperplasia.  Some normal structures, such as hepatoid glands, have more than one cell type (reserve and terminal cells) and can therefore show variation in morphology, and benign tumors of hepatoid glands can have a similar mixture. Nuclear morphology, however, maintains benign features.  Many mammary tumors can show marked variation in cell morphology but histologically would be classified as benign. Indicators of mammary tumor behavior are architectural features, such as local tissue invasion and invasion of vessels. These cannot be assessed using cytology. These exceptions often make cytologic interpretation unreliable, particularly for these types of tissues.  Most spindle cell tumors do not metastasize but are locally aggressive and often difficult to remove. The criteria for malignancy are often less important with respect to the behavior of these tumors than for the epithelial tumors.  Common Cytology Results: Some specific features of cytology preparations can provide a more accurate interpretation of the sample. Listed below are some common results and their interpretation.  Mature Fat Cells: Fat cells, typical balloon-like, cytology   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Fat cells, folded and overlapping, cytology   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Mature fat cells are seen in benign lipomas and mature body fat. It is not possible to differentiate these cytologically. Fat cells are mesenchymal cells, and because they tend not to exfoliate well, they are usually present in low numbers. If a sample has come from the center of a nodular mass, fat cells are diagnostic for lipoma. These clear-staining, balloon-like cells are often in clusters, folded, and overlapping.  Spindle Cells: It is usually not possible to differentiate reactive spindle cells from those of spindle cell neoplasia. Indicators of neoplasia include absence of a reactive stimulus, such as inflammation or hemorrhage, and a higher cell population with more numerous and larger clumps of cells. Greater variation in cell morphology indicates more aggressive behavior. When removed from their tissue, they often round up and can be mistaken for round cells, but there are usually some distinctly spindle cells in most preparations.  Keratin: Keratin, cytology   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Keratin clump, cytology   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Keratin includes nucleated and terminally differentiated non-nucleated squamous epithelial cells. Keratin can be a contaminant from the surface of the skin of the animal or the skin of all handlers of the sample and is a common artifact. It can also be sampled from cutaneous keratin-filled cysts, which are always benign and very common, particularly in dog skin. Large, densely packed clumps of keratin in restricted areas in the center of the slide suggest that keratin is not an artifact but has been sampled from the lesion.  Blood: Blood is a common artifact of fine-needle aspiration but can also come from blood-filled spaces in tissue. These can be non-neoplastic, such as hematomas, aneurysms, or severe bruising, or neoplastic lesions such as hemangiomas and hemangiosarcomas. The presence of spindle cells does not adequately differentiate neoplastic from non-neoplastic causes of hemorrhage ( see Tumor Evaluation:). Spindle cells produce the neoplastic blood vessels in hemangiosarcomas, but especially in young dogs, they can occasionally produce a very cellular capsule to a soft-tissue hematoma. The capsule contains very active fibroblasts, but they are not neoplastic. Blood that has come directly from the vascular system normally contains significant numbers of platelets. Using a 25-gauge needle can help decrease blood contamination. Blood is almost always seen in aspiration from parenchymatous organs, such as the liver, spleen, kidneys, and bone marrow.  No Cells: Lack of cells is a common problem of fine-needle aspiration. If the technique is practiced properly, absence of cells can indicate mesenchymal cell proliferation (including lipomas), because these structural cells within the body are tightly adherent cells that do not exfoliate well.  Cells with Cytoplasmic Granules: The most important type among cells with cytoplasmic granules is the mast cell, given that mast cell tumors are common in dogs. These are medium-sized cells with round nuclei. With Romanowsky stains, the granules are dark blue or purple, small (about the size of bacteria), and usually found in large numbers in the cytoplasm. Less-differentiated mast cells have fewer granules. Cytology cannot be used to grade mast cell tumors; grading always requires histology, because it does not depend on only cell morphology. The cells are fragile, and often there are large numbers of granules in the background that have been released from damaged cells. In dogs, eosinophils are often present and very occasionally can be the dominant cell type; however, they are less common in other species. Mast cell tumors in horses have similar cytology to those in dogs, but in cats the cells in mast cell tumors are often smaller, more uniform, and have less distinct granulation.  Thyroid cells can also have dark granules, usually blue or black. These tyrosine granules are very small, low in number, and can be difficult to see. Larger black granules are associated with melanomas. Cytology cannot differentiate benign from malignant melanomas; however, melanomas on haired skin in dogs are usually benign and those on nonhaired areas, such as the lips, feet, and mouth, are usually malignant. Basal cell tumors also often contain cells with melanin, especially in cats. These tumors are usually benign and cytologically can sometimes be difficult to distinguish from melanomas. Melanin can also be seen in macrophages (melanophages), sometimes in large amounts, but it is usually in much larger clumps within the cytoplasm rather than fine granules that are seen in melanocytes. Very fine magenta granules can sometimes be seen in osteoblastic cells from osteosarcoma. Golden, granular material accumulates in the cytoplasm of macrophages when there has been hemorrhage into soft tissue (hemosiderophages). Liver cells can sometimes contain bile, which stains very dark, and occasionally long, thin strands of dark material can be seen where canaliculi have become filled with bile.  Cells with Cytoplasmic Vacuoles: A large, single vacuole is seen in fat cells. In normal or benign cells, the nuclei are small and often indistinct, and the cells are often folded like a collapsed ball. Smaller cells with larger, more prominent nuclei and some cytoplasm in addition to clear, often small vacuoles are more suggestive of malignancy.  Cells with multiple, small vacuoles with a foamy appearance include macrophages, sebaceous glandular cells, and salivary cells. It can be very difficult to differentiate these; the site and other clinical features can be a deciding factor in interpretation.  Differentiation of Round Cell Tumors: Round cell tumors include mast cells, plasma cells, lymphocytes, histiocytic cells, and transmissible venereal tumor cells. Mast cells have distinctive granules within the cytoplasm and are usually easily identified; if they are the dominant cell type, this is diagnostic for a mast cell tumor. In rare cases, mast cells can have few or no granules in the cytoplasm. Lymphoid cells classically have a very high nucleus:cytoplasm ratio; few other cells have this feature. Neoplastic, lymphoid cells are medium size to large, with a nucleus at least 1.5 times the size of an erythrocyte. Nucleoli are often multiple, sometimes quite prominent. However, the rare cases of small-cell lymphoma have cells indistinguishable from normal lymphocytes.  Cells of a histiocytoma (Langerhans cells) are not especially histiocytic cytologically. They are round cells with a small to moderate amount of pale-staining cytoplasm. They are fairly uniform and have nuclei that are eccentric within the cell. Nucleoli are indistinct. True histiocytic cells are slightly more problematic to interpret. These are part of the cell line that includes the antigen-presenting cells, such as macrophages and Langerhans cells, but can range from inflammatory and reactive cells to highly malignant round cell tumors. They tend to be larger than the other round cells with more cytoplasm, sometimes are vacuolated, and can have oval or indented nuclei. Infiltrates of histiocytic cells are often problematic, even with a full-tissue biopsy examination, and always require histologic examination to assess behavior.  Histiocytoma, cytology   Image Courtesy of Abbey Veterinary Services.  Neoplastic plasma cells include cells of myeloma. These are usually well differentiated and have most of the characteristics of normal plasma cells. When neoplastic, they are found in large numbers with few other cell types present. Benign nodular proliferations of plasma cells, plasmacytomas, show more marked pleomorphism and often differ markedly from normal plasma cells. Many have a slightly histiocytic appearance, and these can be difficult to distinguish cytologically. These cells have a round nucleus and a coarse chromatin pattern, which sometimes becomes clumped around the nuclear membrane. The nucleus is often eccentric with an intensely basophilic cytoplasm and paranuclear pale Golgi zone.  Cells of transmissible venereal tumors tend to have a moderate amount of cytoplasm (more than found in lymphoblasts), often with small vacuoles. Nuclear chromatin is coarse, with one or two fairly prominent nucleoli. Mitotic figures are often numerous. Unlike most cytology preparations of neoplastic lesions, they tend to have moderate variation in the nucleus:cytoplasm ratio.  Cytology of Specific Sites: Lymph Nodes: Normal, hyperplastic, and early neoplastic lymph nodes have a mixed population of cells. Cells are predominantly small lymphocytes with variable numbers of medium and large lymphoid cells and some plasma cells. A uniform population of cells indicates neoplasia. Lymph node aspirates often have a population of cells that are much paler staining and larger, with some cells completely losing their cytoplasm. These cells are in varying stages of degeneration and should be ignored. Size in comparison with RBCs is useful. Normal mature lymphocytes or small neoplastic lymphocytes (rare) have nuclei the same size as RBCs. However, neoplastic lymphoid cells have nuclei at least 1.5 times the diameter of RBCs. Lymphomatous lymph nodes may still contain a significant number of normal lymphoid cells. The proportion of smaller mature lymphocytes must then be compared with the larger immature cells to differentiate hyperplasia from neoplasia. The proportion considered significant varies, but in general, most cytologists consider a diagnosis of lymphoma when immature cells are >50% of the cell population. Some cytologists require a higher percentage of immature cells, particularly if there is only one lymph node enlarged. If there is doubt, a biopsy should be performed. Histopathologic confirmation of diagnosis is essential if therapy for lymphoma is considered and is always needed for full grading.  Submandibular lymph nodes are often difficult to assess. They drain the buccal and nasal areas and are subject to strong antigenic stimuli. They frequently undergo hyperplasia, often histologically atypical, especially in cats. Cats also develop unusual neoplastic conditions affecting this node, such as the T cell–rich B-cell lymphoma and Hodgkin-like lymphoma, both of which have a majority of normal lymph node cells. For these reasons, great care must be taken in the interpretation of lesions involving the submandibular lymph nodes, because false-negative and false-positive results for neoplasia are not uncommon.  Aspirates from suspected enlarged submandibular lymph nodes often yield only large foamy cells, which are salivary cells. This result can be due either to sampling error or to hypertrophy of the salivary gland in cases of sialoadenosis. The cause of sialoadenosis is not understood, but a significant minority of submandibular aspirates contain only these cells.  Body Cavity Fluids: Meaningful analysis of fluids from body cavities requires total protein (measured with a handheld refractometer), total cell count, and a differential of cell types present ( see Table: Characteristics of Transudates and Exudate). Pure transudates are rare, because they rapidly become modified by leakage of fluid from lymphatics or blood vessels and attraction of mixed inflammatory cells. Transudates attract activated macrophages with varying numbers of nondegenerate neutrophils. The lymphocytes that may also be present are classified as small, but most look slightly larger than circulating lymphocytes and are part of the reactive process of the fluid in the body cavity. In addition, when fluid accumulates in the body cavity, the lining mesothelial cells proliferate and are shed into the fluid. These cells are large, often multinucleated, vary in appearance, and often are seen in groups with large nucleoli. They sometimes form grape-like clusters with a narrow, pale space between the cells. These features are usually considered to be associated with malignancy, but in this case, the cells are simply reactive and not neoplastic. Care must be taken to differentiate these mesothelial cells from neoplastic cells within the body fluid. A small number of these cells typically have a corona around the cytoplasmic envelope (giving a fuzzy outline); this is a distinguishing feature of mesothelial cells.  Table Characteristics of Transudates and Exudate Mesothelial cells can be present in very large numbers, especially in pericardial fluid. Malignant mesotheliomas are rare in domestic species, but it is not possible to differentiate neoplastic from reactive mesothelial cells on cytologic examination. The degree of polyploidy is not a distinguishing feature.  Mixed inflammatory cells increase in number as a transudate becomes modified and are present in large numbers in an exudate. Mesothelial cells would be expected in this type of sample, and it can therefore be useful to look for a second population when checking for neoplasia. Smoothly demarcated aggregates of atypical cells with no narrow spaces between the cells may indicate a second population of carcinoma cells.  Tracheal or Bronchoalveolar Lavage (BAL): Respiratory epithelial cells are seen in BAL from healthy and diseased animals. The epithelial cells may retain their original structure with a ciliated surface and basal nuclei, but they often appear round with indistinct cilia.  Macrophages are usually the dominant inflammatory cell type in BAL from healthy animals. These come from deep in the alveoli and are part of the normal defense mechanisms. They greatly increase with fluid accumulation in the lung (eg, cardiovascular insufficiency) and in inflammatory conditions, where they are accompanied by other inflammatory cells. Debris, foreign material, hemosiderin, RBCs, and microorganisms can sometimes be seen in the cytoplasm of these cells. Macrophages containing hemosiderin in people are called heart failure cells, but their cause is less specific in domestic species. There are increased numbers of macrophages in many subacute and chronic lung disorders.  In healthy dogs and cats, neutrophils contribute <5% of cells in BAL preparations. Neutrophils are nonspecific inflammatory cells in the respiratory system and do not necessarily indicate infection. They can be the most numerous cells in an inflammatory reaction, even in cases of allergy. However, when neutrophils are present, the cytoplasm should always be examined carefully for the presence of any infectious agent. Bacteria can also sometimes be seen in the extracellular parts of the smear, but extracellular bacteria are often contaminants from the pharynx.  Great care must be taken to differentiate eosinophils from neutrophils in BAL preparations because the granules are often faint and difficult to identify. Eosinophils can comprise up to 5% of cells in BAL from healthy dogs but may reach 10% in healthy cats. Eosinophils that comprise >10% of cells indicate an allergic respiratory disease, although lungworms and heartworms can also cause this reaction. With lungworm infestation, larvae are sometimes present as large coiled structures.  Nucleated and nonnucleated squamous cells are commonly seen in BAL preparations and are often associated with bacteria on the cell surface. This indicates contamination from the pharynx. Bacteria are normal inhabitants of the pharynx, in particular Simonsiella, which are very large, ladder-like organisms. Their presence confirms contamination from the pharynx. If bacteria are present along with squamous epithelial cells, it may not be possible to conclude whether the bacteria are from the respiratory tree or the pharynx. Bacteria in the cytoplasm of neutrophils confirms a significant infection.  Synovial Fluid: Full examination of synovial fluid should include protein content, mucin clot formation, viscosity, cell count and differential, and direct cytologic examination. It is usually not feasible to perform all of these tests in a practice setting, but cytologic examination and physical examination can usually give a good estimate of the results of most of these tests. Cytology, therefore, is the most useful single test in synovial fluid examination.  Sampling technique requires the following equipment: a 3-mL syringe, a 21- or 25-gauge needle, clean glass slides, and various collection tubes (plain, EDTA, and heparin). This technique always requires a degree of sedation, and a sterile technique is essential. Each joint has a recommended site for aspiration (beyond the scope of this discussion) and generally requires slight flexion or hyperextension. The needle attached to the syringe is slowly advanced into the joint space and, taking care not to scratch the articular surface, gentle suction is applied. Normal joint fluid is viscous and sticky and of small volume. The volume of fluid, however, depends on the size of the animal, the joint sampled, and the degree of effusion into the joint. When sample size is sufficient, it is essential to release the suction on the syringe before withdrawing the needle.  Sample handling is critical; because many tests can be performed on synovial fluid, and cytology is the most important, sometimes the sample volume is so small that no other test is possible. Therefore, a plain smear should always be made and quickly air dried as soon as the sample is obtained. Most tests can be performed on samples without anticoagulant (a plain red-topped tube), or the sample can be left in the sampling syringe. However, blood contamination, hemarthrosis, and inflammatory effusion introduce fibrin into the joint, and the sample may clot. Placing part of the sample into an EDTA tube can prevent this, but EDTA can interfere in the mucin clot test and, for this reason, a heparinized sample may also be necessary.  Results of cytology preparations can indicate the number of cells present, the type of cell and the differential, the presence of tumor cells, and the presence of bacteria. They can also give an indication of viscosity. In fluid of normal or increased viscosity, cells tend to align in rows in the direction of the smearing; this is described as windrowing.  In healthy animals, cell counts vary widely (eg, 0–4,400/mL in dogs), but they are usually very low. Counts >500/mL in dogs generally indicate a significant increase. Normal synovial fluid contains ~2 cells/high-powered field (400X magnification). In the vast majority of cases where there is an increased cell content, cell numbers are either low (up to 4 or 5 cells/high-powered field) in degenerative joint disease or very high in septic or autoimmune arthritis. Intermediate equivocal results are extremely uncommon.  Cell types include joint mononuclear cells, which are a mixture of circulating monocytes, tissue macrophages, and synovial lining cells. It is not possible, or even necessary, to differentiate these cells, because they all have a similar morphology and all react to similar stimuli. Cytoplasmic vacuolation of these cells, and especially the presence of phagocytosis of debris or RBCs, indicate activation, a feature not seen in normal joint mononuclear cells. In degenerative joint disease, synovial fluid usually contains only macrophages, occasionally with extremely low numbers of neutrophils.  Hemorrhage is common in synovial preparations but is frequently an artifact. True hemarthrosis provides a synovial fluid sample that is uniformly contaminated with blood at the time of sampling. If the blood contamination occurs at the very end of the sampling procedure with clear fluid initially, this is most likely artifact. In addition, in true hemarthrosis, RBCs may be seen in the cytoplasm of macrophages. Artifactual blood contamination will also introduce WBCs, such as neutrophils, making interpretation of inflammatory cells in the sample difficult, although blood contamination still gives only a low cell number.  Neutrophils are present in large numbers in both septic arthritis and autoimmune joint disease. These two conditions can usually be differentiated by the clinical history. In septic arthritis, bacteria are sometimes found within the cytoplasm of phagocytic cells. The absence of bacteria, either within cytology preparations or by culture, does not exclude bacteria as a cause of arthritis. False-negative results for bacteria are not uncommon.  Lymphocytes are often present in very small numbers in inflammatory processes but are not specific for a particular cause.  Osteoclasts are very occasionally seen when there has been erosion of the articular cartilage with exposure of the underlying bone.  Neoplastic cells in joint fluid are rare, although joints can be the site of both primary and secondary tumors.  Macrophages increase with any damage to a joint, especially in cases of degenerative joint disease. Cytoplasmic vacuolation of these cells, and especially the presence of phagocytosis of debris or RBCs, indicate macrophage activation, a feature not seen in normal joint mononuclear cells. In degenerative joint disease, synovial fluid often contains only macrophages.  Nasal Cavity: The cytology of nasal flush preparations is similar to that seen with BAL preparations. A small number of respiratory epithelial cells are usually flushed out along with exudate. A predominance of eosinophils may indicate inhaled allergens, parasites, or fungi and may occasionally indicate bacteria or neoplasia. The presence of eosinophils in the nasal cavity therefore is less indicative of a specific process than in some other sites, eg, the trachea or bronchi.  Neutrophils are the most common exudative cell but, as with BAL, often indicate secondary infection. In the case of intranasal neoplasia, cells with neoplastic characteristics ( see Neoplasia:) may be present, but absence of these cells does not exclude neoplasia. Only a minority of neoplastic processes erode the overlying respiratory epithelium and allow exfoliation of neoplastic cells.  Similarly, absence of fungal hyphae within the preparation does not exclude fungal infection. Unless fungal plaques are sampled directly for both cytology and culture, false-negative results are common. Viral inclusions are rarely seen.  Vaginal Cytology: This can be used to identify the various stages of the canine estrous cycle, but results must be interpreted in conjunction with the animal’s behavior. A sample of exfoliated cells is obtained from the vaginal vault cranial to the urethral orifice with a cotton-tipped swab or glass rod. Cells are gently rolled onto a glass slide, air dried, and stained. Features to be identified include neutrophils, bacteria, RBCs, and the types of epithelial cells. Epithelial cells (in increasing order of differentiation) are parabasal, small and large intermediate cells, and superficial cells. Parabasal cells are small, with central round nuclei, indistinct nucleoli, a relatively narrow band of cytoplasm, and a nucleus:cytoplasm ratio of ~1:1. Small intermediate cells have a similar nucleus but a much larger amount of cytoplasm. Large intermediate cells have a similar nucleus with very large amounts of cytoplasm and an angular, irregular outline. Superficial cells also have large amounts of cytoplasm, but their nuclei are pyknotic (small and contracted) or absent.  The stages of the estrous cycle change gradually. If a preparation does not conform exactly to a specific part of the cycle, judgment must be made regarding what stages are present. In proestrus, all types of epithelial cells are present along with neutrophils, RBCs, and mucus. As proestrus progresses, the epithelial cells increasingly approach terminal differentiation (superficial cells), and neutrophils slowly decrease. Bacteria are often present in large numbers. In estrus, >90% of epithelial cells are superficial cells, with no background mucus. There are large numbers of bacteria, but no neutrophils. In diestrus, parabasal and intermediate cells are >80% of the total epithelial cells. Variable numbers of neutrophils and bacteria are present but usually fewer than in proestrus. It can be difficult to differentiate some stages of proestrus from diestrus. In anestrus, parabasal and intermediate cells predominate. Neutrophils and bacteria are rare. RBCs do not help differentiate the stages of estrus.  Cerebrospinal Fluid: Interpretation of CSF cytology is difficult, because it can be hard to obtain enough well-preserved cells for examination before the sample deteriorates. Cell counts in normal CSF are low (0–5 cells/μL in dogs and 0–8 cells/μL in cats). However, there is a large variation in cell counts between individuals; counts can also vary between cysternal and lumbar taps in the same individual. Because the albumin level of CSF is ~20% of that found in serum, the cells that are present rapidly degenerate. Cell counts should ideally be done and morphology examined within 1 hr of collection.  Because of the low cell numbers, the use of an automated cell counter is usually not appropriate. A hemocytometer can be used for cell counts, and a cytocentrifuge for cytology preparations. A simplified sedimentation technique (description of which is beyond the scope of this discussion) to concentrate cells onto a slide is suitable for practice use. The presence of more than one or two nucleated cells in a plain smear of CSF should be considered potentially significant.  In CSF, an increase in nucleated cells is called pleocytosis. There is tremendous variation and overlap in both the degree of pleocytosis and the types of cells present in both infectious and noninfectious conditions in the CNS. Interpretation should be integrated with the other clinical details of the case. If neutrophils and/or macrophages are present, the cytoplasm of the cells should be searched for bacteria and fungi. The absence of organisms or pleocytosis does not exclude infection, and noninfectious conditions in the CNS can also produce a neutrophilic pleocytosis.  Apart from lymphoma, it is rare to find neoplastic cells in CSF. If noninflammatory cells are present in the CSF, they should be interpreted using the basic principles detailed above.  Urine Cytology: Urine can be examined as a wet preparation or as a dried cytology smear. Because of the absence of staining in a wet preparation, these are better limited to examination for crystals and RBCs. Although nucleated cells may be seen, in most cases they cannot be identified and are better examined using a dried cytology smear.  There are at least 10 common forms of urinary crystals. Identification is not discussed here but may be readily accomplished by use of good reference illustrations. (Also see Urolithiasis in Small Animals.)  Because cells in urine rapidly degenerate, particularly if bacteria are present, centrifuged preparations of urine samples should be examined rapidly after sampling. If this is not possible, boric acid is often added to urine to prevent degeneration and bacterial overgrowth, although its effect may be very limited. If a delay between sampling and examination is likely, a better preservation method is the addition of a few drops of formalin; however,the traditional Romanowsky stains cannot then be used. H&E stain is a better alternative for formalin-fixed samples.  Normal urine usually has very few nucleated cells. Single urothelial cells are occasionally present. Squamous epithelial cells are also seen in urine and come from the terminal urethra, vagina, vulva, and preputial epithelium. Squamous metaplasia of bladder epithelium after chronic inflammation is very rare.  Neoplastic cells in urine samples are almost always epithelial. They are rounded polygonal cells, often clumped, with marked variation in morphology, especially the nucleus:cytoplasm ratio. Uniform cells are more likely to be normal. Mildly pleomorphic cells can be associated with hyperplasia (eg, some cases of polypoid cystitis).  The inflammatory cells seen in cystitis are almost exclusively neutrophils. Eosinophils are seen in some rare, specific inflammatory conditions, but macrophages are very uncommon even in chronic conditions. By far the most common cause of inflammation is infection, so the cytoplasm of the neutrophils should be examined carefully for bacteria. It is very uncommon to see a significant neutrophil component accompanying neoplasia or calculi.  RBCs are commonly seen with neoplastic and inflammatory diseases of the bladder but are also often seen without an indication of other pathology. This can be a sampling artifact but is also a common finding in cases of interstitial cystitis. In cats, this term is often used synonymously with feline urologic syndrome, but interstitial cystitis also is seen in dogs and people, suggesting other unknown pathogenic factors that can cause this condition. Persistent hematuria without cytologic evidence of neoplasia or inflammation may indicate interstitial cystitis.  Also see Urinalysis.  Liver Cytology: Although cytology is a popular method to investigate liver disease, there is disagreement on its usefulness. Blood contamination is found in most samples and may overshadow inflammatory infiltrates by introducing circulating WBCs. Diagnosis of many hepatic diseases relies on architectural features and the distribution of the changes within the liver rather than on the morphology of individual cells. Finally, in some hepatic disorders, hepatocytes proliferate without significant changes in their individual morphology (see below). These factors limit the amount of information that can be obtained from cytology of liver tissue.  Sampling methods are similar to those used for other organs. Sampling is usually performed under guidance of ultrasound, but blind sampling can be performed at the tenth intercostal space at the level of the connection of rib to rib cartilage. Bleeding during this procedure is not a significant risk.  In the healthy liver, hepatocytes are plump, polygonal rounded cells with a diameter of 25–30 microns. Nuclei are central and round with a single large, prominent nucleolus. A few cells are binucleated. There is a large amount of blue-staining cytoplasm that usually appears granular.  Changes in the metabolism of liver cells can be seen within the cytoplasm. The presence of numerous small, discrete vacuoles or one large vacuole indicates accumulation of fat. This has several potential causes and is prominent in feline hepatic lipidosis syndrome, starvation, pregnancy, and diabetes mellitus. Enlarged hepatocytes with a pale granular-staining cytoplasm but no discrete vacuoles are characteristic of excess glycogen storage. This is most often caused by increased levels of circulating steroids.  Bile stasis and pigment accumulation (eg, iron) can also be assessed by examination of the cytoplasm. Hepatocytes normally accumulate lipofuscin pigment, noted as small, fairly uniform, dark-staining granules, whereas bile and often hemosiderin tend to appear as slightly larger dark-staining bodies within the cytoplasm. Bile accumulation within the canaliculae (canalicular plugs) can also occasionally be seen. These appear as black ribbons on the surface of hepatocytes.  Cytologic interpretation of inflammation is difficult because of the inevitable blood contamination of samples. Inflammation should be considered significant only if it is present within clusters of hepatocytes. Although the individual inflammatory cells can be recognized, it is not possible to indicate which part of the liver is principally affected. Neutrophils can be seen in diffuse hepatitis and also in more focal cholangitis. Small, mature inflammatory lymphocytes are usually seen in periportal inflammatory conditions, such as lymphocytic pericholangitis in cats and chronic active hepatitis in dogs. Macrophages can also be seen in the chronic inflammatory conditions and also in certain infections. Phagocytic cells should be investigated for the presence of organisms within the cytoplasm, but this is uncommon in liver disease.  Primary proliferative nodular hepatocellular lesions include regenerative hyperplasia, nodular hyperplasia, adenoma (hepatoma), and hepatocellular carcinoma. Biliary proliferations can appear as cysts, adenomas, or carcinomas. Bile duct cells tend to be smaller than hepatocytes with less cytoplasm. They are cuboidal or low columnar cells that occasionally produce tubular structures within cytology samples. The cytoplasm is also more uniformly pale staining and not significantly granular. Nucleoli are smaller and less distinct. Significant cell harvest from cystic bile ducts is uncommon because most of these lesions are simply cystic space rather than cellular. If a significant number of biliary epithelial cells are obtained, neoplasia is most likely. However, malignant bile duct cells are more commonly uniform in size and shape and, therefore, do not always show the morphologic features usually associated with malignancy.  Hepatocellular proliferation is a difficult area of interpretation, because hepatocytes in benign proliferative lesions are very similar to those in well-differentiated carcinomas and indeed often cannot be differentiated even from normal hepatocytes. Only in cases with poorly differentiated pleomorphic cells can an adequate interpretation of malignancy be made. The benign and non-neoplastic proliferations always have the same morphology as normal hepatocytes. Therefore, false-negative results for proliferative lesions within the liver are common. Cytology is thus of limited value for nodular hepatocellular lesions.  Cytology can be a useful technique for diagnosis of round cell tumors in the liver. Even with severe inflammatory lesions, lymphocytes are present in low numbers and are generally small, mature lymphocytes. A large population of medium and large lymphoid cells indicates lymphoma. No other condition will give this result.  The other common round cell tumor that can affect the liver (particularly in cats but also occasionally in dogs) is mast cell tumor. The granules within mast cells are metachromatic, facilitating diagnosis. Aspirates of normal liver may contain a few mast cells, but in neoplasia they are usually present in large numbers. If other cells are obtained from cytology preparations, they should be interpreted using the principles described above.  Kidney Cytology: Normal renal aspirates have almost a pure population of renal tubular cells. These are uniform, medium-sized cells of ~17–20 microns with central nuclei, small indistinct nucleoli, and a moderate amount of pale-staining cytoplasm. In cats, lipid droplets within the cytoplasm are a common, normal feature. The cells can be present either singly or in clusters and can occasionally be seen as tubular structures. They sometimes contain small, dark granules within the cytoplasm.  Renal lymphoma is the most common neoplastic disease of the kidney in cats and dogs. Because the cells are usually widely distributed within the tissue, false-negative results with cytologic examination are uncommon. Diagnosis can be made using the criteria described above. Primary renal tumors are uncommon.  Cystic lesions include renal cysts, most commonly seen in cats but also occasionally in dogs, and hydronephrosis. In both disorders, cell harvest is usually low, with a large amount of fluid. The cellular component of the sample is rarely helpful in identifying further the nature of the cystic structure.  Most inflammatory lesions in the kidney are chronic and produce fibrous connective tissue. Cell harvest from these lesions is usually exceedingly low, and cytology is not typically a useful technique. Pyogenic inflammation can sometimes be diagnosed. Cytology may help diagnose feline infectious peritonitis, although diagnosis using serologic techniques is more common. Because of the usually severe and widespread nature of the inflammation, cell harvest is usually high. The wide mixture of inflammatory cells present in feline infectious peritonitis, with a predominance of neutrophils, along with an appropriate history, are typical of the disorder.  Mammary Cytology: Cytology is useful to differentiate inflammatory from neoplastic nodular lesions within mammary tissue. Mammary tumors are not commonly inflamed. It is less useful to differentiate the neoplastic conditions.  Neoplastic lesions must be interpreted using the criteria listed above ( see Neoplasia:). The criteria most useful to determine the behavior and prognosis of a mammary tumor are local tissue and vessel invasion, not cell morphology. These are best assessed histologically rather than cytologically. Therefore, cellular morphology is not necessarily a good guide to tumor behavior. In cats, malignant cells are often uniform and do not exhibit the normal malignant features; the size of the malignant tumor is the most useful prognostic indicator. Clinical Hematology ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Sept 2024 Red Blood Cells: | White Blood Cells: | Platelets: | Blood Sample Preparation and Evaluation: Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (6) Tables (0) Videos (0) Hematology refers to the study of the numbers and morphology of the cellular elements of the blood—the RBCs (erythrocytes), WBCs (leukocytes), and platelets (thrombocytes)—and the use of these results in the diagnosis and monitoring of disease. (Also see Hematopoietic System Introduction.)  Red Blood Cells: Three RBC measurements are routinely done: packed cell volume (PCV), the proportion of whole blood volume occupied by RBCs; hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration of whole lysed blood; and RBC count, the number of RBCs per unit volume of whole blood. Although these are separate estimations, they are in effect three ways to measure the same thing, and it is incorrect to attempt to interpret them as separate variables. Inasmuch as they do vary in relation to each other, they allow calculation of two further meaningful parameters, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC).   equation  equation MCV varies widely between mammalian species, from ~15 fL in goats to ~90 fL in people. Avian and reptilian red cells are even larger, up to 300 fL. Nevertheless, MCHC varies little with species (or erythrocyte size), at ~330 g/L.  Several artifacts can cause significant and potentially misleading alterations to measured RBC parameters: 1) old samples cause RBCs to swell, thus increasing PCV and MCV and decreasing MCHC; 2) lipemia causes a falsely high Hgb reading, and hence a falsely high MCHC; 3) hemolysis causes PCV to decrease while Hgb remains unchanged, again leading to a falsely high MCHC; 4) underfilling of the tube causes RBCs to shrink, causing PCV and MCV to decrease and MCHC to increase; 5) autoagglutination causes a falsely low RBC count, and hence a falsely high MCV.  Visual description of RBC morphology on a Romanowsky stain also provides useful diagnostic information. The most common terms include 1) normocytic—cells are of normal size; 2) macrocytes—abnormally large cells, usually polychromatophilic; 3) microcytes—abnormally small cells, usually caused by a lack of hemoglobin precursors; 4) anisocytosis—variation in size of cells due to macrocytes, microcytes, or both; 5) normochromic—cells are of normal color; 6) polychromasia—variation in color of the cells, which usually describes the appearance of large, juvenile, bluish-staining polychromatophilic macrocytes (these broadly correspond to the “reticulocyte” seen with new methylene blue staining, in which the reticulum represents the remnants of the nucleus); 7) hypochromasia—decrease in staining density of the cells, usually due to a lack of hemoglobin precursors, especially iron; and 8) annulocyte—extreme form of hypochromic cell with only a thin rim of hemoglobin.  PCV is the variable usually used to assess the basic status of the erythron—increased in polycythemia, decreased in anemia—although if a sample is too hemolyzed to allow measurement of PCV, a meaningful Hgb measurement may still be obtained. RBC count as such should not be interpreted clinically.  An abnormally high PCV (polycythemia) may be relative, due to a change in the proportion of circulating RBCs to blood plasma without any change in the size of the erythron, or absolute, due to a real increase in erythron size. Absolute polycythemia may be primary (eg, polycythemia vera or, rarely, erythropoietin-producing tumors) or secondary (a consequence of disease in another organ system). (Also see Erythrocytosis (Polycythemia).)  Polycythemia vera and erythropoietin-producing tumors should be suspected only when PCV is very high, normally >0.7. The former is characterized by normal, mature RBCs and a normal (or low) erythropoietin concentration, whereas the latter may show a regenerative RBC picture with high erythropoietin concentration. Relative polycythemia may also be associated with very high PCV values, and normal, mature RBCs. Secondary polycythemia generally shows a more modest increase in PCV, often with evidence of regeneration (more so when the cause is pulmonary or cardiac, less so when the cause is hormonal). It is often possible to make the differential diagnosis of polycythemia on clinical grounds.  Abnormally low PCV (anemia) may be caused by loss of blood (hemorrhage), breakdown of RBCs in circulation (hemolysis), or lack of production of RBCs by the bone marrow (hypoplasia or aplasia). Presentation varies according to whether the condition is acute or chronic. Aplastic anemia is always chronic in onset, because anemia occurs gradually as existing cells reach the end of their lifespan. (Also see Anemia.)  In acute hemorrhagic anemia, external blood loss is easily appreciated clinically, but blood loss into a body cavity may be determined only on paracentesis. Initially, all hematologic parameters may be normal, because it may take 12 hr for fluid shifts to produce a decrease in the PCV. Within a few days, RBCs become regenerative, with juvenile forms appearing in circulation (except in horses, in which circulating evidence of regeneration is not readily appreciable). These consist of polychromatophilic macrocytes and normoblasts (nucleated RBCs). Late normoblasts have a small, nonviable nucleus and a moderate amount of cytoplasm colored similarly to that of the polychromatophilic macrocytes, whereas early normoblasts have a larger, viable nucleus and scanty cytoplasm. These are most easily distinguished from lymphocytes by their more densely staining nucleus.  If substantial amounts of blood have been lost from the body, the RBC picture may become hypochromic. Thus, this type of anemia shows an increase in MCV and a decrease in MCHC. If bleeding is into a body cavity, hypochromasia may not be evident because hemoglobin precursors will be recycled. However, slight jaundice may be seen as the sequestered cells are broken down. Some sequestered cells may also be returned to the circulation intact, if somewhat misshapen.  In acute hemolytic anemia, PCV will decrease immediately, and in the early stages some jaundice will be evident. In the very early stages, even a sample collected with extreme care may be markedly hemolyzed. As with hemorrhagic anemia, the RBCs will become regenerative within a few days, with polychromatophilic macrocytes and nucleated RBCs evident. Because hemoglobin precursors are not lost from the body, true hypochromasia is not seen.  Chronic hemorrhagic anemia may be difficult to appreciate if blood is lost in the feces or urine, or due to bloodsucking ectoparasites. Anemia may be severe, and the RBC picture will be regenerative on presentation. Hypochromasia is usually very marked. In very longstanding conditions, depletion of iron and other hemoglobin precursors can become so marked that most of the cells are microcytic, and MCV may paradoxically decrease. Intermittent intra-abdominal hemorrhage leads to a somewhat different picture, because blood shed into the peritoneal cavity can be returned to the circulation. PCV may therefore recover quickly (until the next episode), and signs of depletion of hemoglobin constituents do not emerge.  In chronic hemolytic anemia, RBCs are regenerative on presentation, except that some cases of autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) paradoxically show little or no regeneration until treatment has been initiated. Hypochromasia is less marked than in hemorrhagic conditions, and misshapen RBCs (including target cells and folded cells) are more common. The spherocyte, in which the erythrocyte loses its classic biconcave shape, is essentially pathognomonic for AIHA. Jaundice may be absent, because the products of the destruction of the RBCs may be cleared by the reticuloendothelial system and the liver as quickly as they are formed.  Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, blood smear (100X), dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Autoimmune hemolytic anemia, blood smear (50X), dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  Hypoplastic and aplastic anemia may be mild if RBC production is merely depressed secondary to some other disease. Protein, mineral, or vitamin deficiencies may cause hypoplastic anemia, but these are more likely to be secondary to another disease (eg, chronic hemorrhage or malabsorption) than simple dietary deficiency. Other diseases may cause depression of erythropoietin production, eg, renal failure, deficiencies of hormones that usually stimulate erythropoietin production (eg, hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism), and chronic, debilitating conditions (eg, chronic infections, chronic parasitism, and neoplasia). RBC morphology is nonregenerative and may be hypochromic if a deficiency state is involved. Paradoxically, vitamin B12 and/or folic acid deficiency produces a macrocytic RBC picture due to early maturation arrest of the erythrocytes. Neoplasia of the bone marrow may cause severe anemia as erythropoietic elements are crowded out, but some regeneration may be seen as the remaining bone marrow attempts to compensate. In this case, other bone marrow cell lines will also be affected.  Nonregenerative anemia, blood smear, cat   Image Courtesy of Dr. John W. Harvey.  True aplastic anemia refers to a failure of the entire bone marrow. The shorter-lived granulocytes and platelets decrease first, followed by a progressively severe anemia that is normocytic and normochromic.  White Blood Cells: The WBCs consist of the granulocytes (neutrophils in most mammals, called heterophils in rabbits, reptiles, and birds [and these look like eosinophils in smears]; eosinophils; and basophils) and the agranulocytes (lymphocytes and monocytes). Although each type is traditionally counted by determination of its percentage of the total WBC population, meaningful interpretation requires that the absolute number of each type be calculated by multiplying the total WBC count by the fraction attributable to the individual cell type. Percentages of each cell type alone are not helpful. An increased percentage that is due to an absolute decrease in another cell type is not an increase at all.  Mature neutrophils have a lobulated nucleus, but when demand is high, immature cells with an unlobulated band nucleus (no constriction of the nucleus is more than half the width of the nucleus) may be released into circulation. They function as phagocytes and are important in infectious conditions and in inflammation. Increased neutrophil counts (neutrophilia) are caused by inflammation, bacterial infection, acute stress, steroid effects, and neoplasia of the granulocytic cell line (granulocytic leukemia can be difficult to differentiate from a simple neutrophilia without special stains or bone marrow biopsy). Decreased neutrophil counts (neutropenia) are caused by viral infections, toxin exposure (including foodborne toxins), certain drugs (eg, carbimazole and methimazole), autoimmune destruction of neutrophils, bone marrow neoplasia not involving the granulocytes, and bone marrow aplasia.  Eosinophils are characterized by prominent pink-staining granules on a Romanowsky stain. They inactivate histamine and inhibit edema formation. Increased eosinophil counts (eosinophilia) are caused by allergic/hypersensitivity reactions, parasitism, tissue injury, mast cell tumors, estrus, and pregnancy or parturition in the bitch. Some large dog breeds (eg, German and Belgian Shepherds, Rottweilers) normally have a relatively high eosinophil count. Extremely high eosinophil counts (hypereosinophilic syndrome), possibly due to an out-of-control hypersensitivity reaction, and eosinophil leukemia (a form of chronic myeloid leukemia) are also described. Decreased eosinophil count (eosinopenia) is almost always caused by the action of glucocorticoids, either endogenous or therapeutic.  Basophils are rare in most species and are characterized by blue-staining granules on a Romanowsky stain. They are more easily seen in cattle. They are closely related to mast cells and, like them, initiate the inflammatory response by releasing histamine. An increased basophil count (basophilia) accompanies eosinophilia in some species as part of the hypersensitivity reaction.  Monocytes are large cells with blue-gray cytoplasm, which may be vacuolated, and a kidney bean-shaped or lobulated nucleus. Their main function is phagocytosis, and they are essentially identical to tissue macrophages. An increased monocyte count (monocytosis) may occur in any chronic disease, especially chronic inflammation, and may be very marked in neoplasia. Monocytes also increase as part of the steroid response in dogs.  Lymphocytes mainly develop outside the bone marrow in the lymph nodes, spleen, and gut-associated lymphoid tissue. They are the smallest of the WBCs, with a round, evenly staining nucleus and sparse cytoplasm. Larger, reactive lymphocytes can be seen after antigenic stimulation, and care must be taken to differentiate them from neoplastic lymphocytes. Their primary function is immunologic, including both antibody production and cell-mediated immune responses. Some survive only a few days, but many are long-lived. The number in circulation is a balance between populations in the blood, lymph, lymph nodes, and splenic follicles and does not necessarily reflect changes in lymphopoiesis. An increased lymphocyte count (lymphocytosis) may occur for physiologic reasons, especially in cats, but significant increases usually indicate leukemia. Immature or bizarre cells may also be recognized. Decreased lymphocyte counts (lymphopenia) are usually due to an effect of corticosteroids, either endogenous (stress or Cushing disease) or therapeutic, and may also accompany neutropenia in some viral infections, especially the parvoviruses. Lymphopenia may also be a feature of solid-organ lymphosarcomas, when leukemia is absent.  Platelets: Ecchymosis, abdomen, dog   Image Courtesy of Ontario Veterinary College.  Ecchymosis, mucous membranes, mouth, dog   Image Courtesy of Ontario Veterinary College.  Petechiae, mucous membranes, mouth, dog   Image Courtesy of Ontario Veterinary College.  Mammalian platelets are pale blue granular fragments (much smaller than RBCs) shed from multinucleate megakaryocytes in the bone marrow; avian and reptilian platelets are true cells with nuclei. They maintain the integrity of the endothelium and act as part of the clotting process to repair damaged endothelium, where they ensure mechanical strength of the clot.  Increased platelet counts (thrombocytosis) occur as a reaction to consumption after injury, when large juvenile platelets may also appear; after splenectomy, as splenic stores are liberated to the circulation; after vincristine treatment, which increases platelet shedding from megakaryocytes; and in megakaryocytic leukemia.  Decreased platelet counts (thrombocytopenia) are caused by autoimmune reactions, thrombotic/thrombocytopenic purpura, bone marrow suppression and aplasia, bone marrow neoplasia, and equine infectious anemia. Signs are petechiation and ecchymosis more than frank hemorrhage, and little may be seen until the platelet count is < 20 × 109/L. Platelet functional abnormalities present similarly, but platelet numbers and morphology are normal.  Blood Sample Preparation and Evaluation: In-house hematologic investigations, with a minimum of specialist equipment, can provide almost as much information as a full laboratory analysis, although some estimations are qualitative rather than quantitative.  Blood for hematology should be collected into tubes containing EDTA anticoagulant and immediately mixed well to avoid clotting. Larger (2.5 mL) tubes yield better results than the smaller (1 mL) pediatric tubes and are less likely to clot. Nevertheless, it is essential to fill the tube exactly to the mark, so smaller tubes may be unavoidable for small patients. WBC morphology deteriorates most quickly, especially in equine blood, so if the sample cannot be analyzed immediately, a thin blood smear should be submitted to the laboratory with the blood sample.  PCV is measured by microhematocrit, which is the reference method. A capillary tube is filled ¾ full with well-mixed blood and sealed at one end; heat-sealing is best if a Bunsen burner is available, otherwise a proprietary clay pad is used. The tube is spun in a high-speed microhematocrit centrifuge for 6 min, and the PCV is read using a microhematocrit reader with a sliding cursor. The appearance of the plasma (eg, normal, icteric, hemolyzed, lipemic) and the thickness of the buffy coat, which gives a very rough guide to total WBC count, should be noted.  Further information is obtained from a blood film. This is made by using one slide, with a corner broken off as a spreader, to pull a small drop of blood across a clean slide into a thin film. A suitable film is thin (one erythrocyte thick) and tapers to a feathered edge before the far end of the slide. The broken corner of the spreader slide ensures two straight edges parallel to the long edges of the slide. Immediately after the film is spread, it is dried quickly by fanning the slide in the air. Air-dried smears can be sent to the laboratory in a slide mailer or stained and examined in the practice. Commercial rapid Romanowsky-type stains merely require the slide to be dipped in three colored solutions in succession. Cell morphology is clear and comparable to more permanent stains such as Leishman or May-Gruenwald-Giemsa, although quality deteriorates after a few days. The slide should be allowed to dry naturally or dried with a hair dryer (not wiped dry), and examined under oil immersion.  Clinically useful information may be easily achieved in-house for all hematologic variables. The main deficiency is the absence of a numerical WBC count, and hence of numerical values for the differential WBC count. This may be acceptable for an interim emergency investigation, and a WBC count using a hemocytometer slide may be attempted. A mirrored slide with an Improved Neubauer ruling may be used, with a cover slip fitted so that Newton rings are visible on both sides. The blood sample is diluted 1:20 with Turck fluid or a similar diluent. An automatic pipette capable of dispensing 0.95 mL and 0.05 mL (50 μL) should be used to ensure an accurate dilution. The sample should be mixed well and allowed to stand for 10 min while the stain is taken up by the cells. The chamber of the hemocytometer is then filled by using a capillary (PCV) tube. The number of cells in each of the four large corner squares of the grid are counted, and the total divided by 20 to calculate the total WBC count × 10 9/L.  Several hematologic instruments are available for in-practice use. Those based on centrifugation, in which WBC measurements are made by spreading a stained buffy coat, are not true hematology analyzers, but give approximate counts. Although a numerical estimate of total WBC count is provided, the differential WBC count cannot distinguish between lymphocytes and monocytes, and results do not always correlate well with standard methods. This method is appropriate only as an emergency approximation, and a blood film must always be examined in addition. It is also wise to check the PCV by microhematocrit.  Impedance counters (Coulter principle) are used by diagnostic laboratories and perform well in experienced hands. However, it is difficult to achieve optimal performance without trained technical staff. Instruments not based on the Coulter principle should be avoided for veterinary use, because their results do not necessarily compare well on nonhuman samples. Instruments providing automated differential counts perform poorly on nonhuman blood, and results must never be accepted without also checking a blood film. No hematology laboratory should be without the facility for examining blood films, and a blood film should be examined for every patient sample. Quality assurance issues are the same as those for biochemistry laboratories ( see Clinical Biochemistry). If accuracy and reliability cannot be guaranteed to the same standard as the referral laboratory, then results should not be relied on without external confirmation.  Red Blood Cells: The size, uniformity of size, and presence of microcytes, macrocytes, and abnormally shaped cells should be noted, along with cell color, uniformity of color, and the presence of hypochromasia, polychromasia, and nucleated RBCs. An overall descriptive assessment of the RBC picture should be made, including the degree of regeneration or hypochromasia, if any.  White Blood Cells: A qualitative estimate of numbers should be made (ie, very low, low, normal, high, very high). This can be remarkably consistent with practice. The proportions of each cell type can be estimated, or preferably, a formal differential count of 100–200 cells performed. Unusual or abnormal WBC forms (eg, band or toxic neutrophils), or pathologic cells (eg, prolymphocytes, lymphoblasts, or mast cells) should be noted.  Platelets: A qualitative estimate of platelet numbers, based on how many can be seen in a typical high-power field (oil immersion) should be made. Several fields should be examined, more if numbers appear low. Results can be ranked as none seen (on entire slide), rare (very few on entire slide), low in number (< 5 per high-power field), adequate (5–20 per high-power field), or abundant (>20 per high-power field). Normal platelet numbers in the horse are about half those of other species. In a sample more than a few hours old, platelets may clump into rafts, leaving areas of the slide apparently devoid of platelets. Slides should be scanned for rafts before reporting platelet numbers as low. Enlarged or macroplatelets should also be noted. Urinalysis ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Jun 2025 Urine Appearance | Color: | Clarity: | Odor: | Urine Chemistries | Specific Gravity: | Semiquantitative, Colorimetric Reagent Strips: | Urine pH: | Protein: | Glucose: | Ketones: | Bilirubin/Urobilinogen: | Occult Blood: | Urine Sediment | Red Blood Cells: | White Blood Cells: | Epithelial Cells: | Cylindruria (Casts): | Infectious Organisms: | Crystals: | Lipids: | Spermatozoa: | Plant Material: | Bladder Tumor Antigen Test Urinalysis is an important laboratory test that can be readily performed in veterinary practice and is considered part of a minimum database. It is useful to document various types of urinary tract diseases and may provide information about other systemic diseases, such as liver failure and hemolysis. Urine may be collected by cystocentesis, urethral catheterization, or voiding. Urine should be evaluated within 30 min, but if this is not possible, it may be refrigerated for up to 24 hr or submitted to an outside diagnostic laboratory; however, this may result in crystal precipitation. Refrigeration does not alter urine pH or specific gravity. If cytologic evaluation is required and a delay in preparing the slides is anticipated, then a preservative should be added. A few drops of 10% formalin (exact concentration not necessary) is better than boric acid. However, the usual Romanowsky stains are unsuitable with formalin; if submitting to an outside laboratory, it should be communicated that formalin has been added.  Urine Appearance Color: Normal urine is typically transparent and yellow or amber on visual inspection. The intensity of color is in part related to the volume of urine collected and concentration of urine produced; therefore, it should be interpreted in context of urine specific gravity. Significant disease may exist when urine color is normal. Abnormal urine color may be caused by presence of endogenous or exogenous pigments, but it does not provide specific information. Interpretation of semiquantitative reagent strips, which are colorimetric tests, requires knowledge of urine color because discolored urine may result in a false-positive result. Equine urine may turn brown after a period of time.  Clarity: Urine is typically clear but may become less transparent with pigmenturia, crystalluria, hematuria, pyuria, lipiduria, or when other compounds such as mucus are present. Depending on the cause, increased turbidity may disappear with centrifugation of the sample.  Odor: Normal urine has a slight odor of ammonia; however, the odor depends on urine concentration. Some species, such as cats and goats, have pungent urine odor because of urine composition. Bacterial infection may result in a strong odor due to pyuria; a strong ammonia odor may occur if the bacteria produce urease.  Urine Chemistries Urine must be at room temperature for accurate measurement of urine specific gravity and for chemical analysis. These tests are usually done before centrifugation; however, if urine is discolored or turbid, it may be beneficial to perform these tests on supernatant ( see Urine Sediment).  Specific Gravity: Specific gravity is defined as the ratio of the weight of a volume of liquid to the weight of an equal volume of distilled water; therefore, it depends on the number, size, and weight of particles in the liquid. It is different from osmolality, which depends only on the number of particles in the liquid; measurement of osmolality requires specialized instrumentation.  The urine specific gravity (SG) is determined using a refractometer designed for veterinary samples, which includes a scale calibrated specifically for cat urine. SG for species other than cats should be determined using the scale for dogs. In healthy animals, SG is highly variable, depending on fluid and electrolyte balance of the body. It is normally at least 1.015. Interpretation of SG, therefore, depends on the clinical presentation and serum chemistry findings. ( See also heading on page Urinary System Introduction.) An animal that is dehydrated or has other causes of prerenal azotemia will have hypersthenuric urine with an SG >1.025–1.040 (depending on species). Dilute urine in a dehydrated or azotemic animal is abnormal and could be caused by renal failure, hypo- or hyperadrenocorticism, hypercalcemia, diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, and diuretic therapy. In cases of diabetes insipidus, values < 1.010 can be expected. Glucosuria increases the SG despite increased urine volume.  Semiquantitative, Colorimetric Reagent Strips: Reagent strips such as Multistix® or Chemstrip ® can be used to perform several semiquantitative chemical evaluations simultaneously. They are used routinely to determine urine pH, protein, glucose, ketones, bilirubin/urobilinogen, and occult blood. Some reagent strips include test pads for leukocyte esterase (for detection of WBCs), nitrite (for detection of bacteria), and SG; these are not valid in animals and should not be used. Reagent strips are adversely affected by moisture and have a limited shelf life. Bottles should be kept tightly capped, and unused strips should be discarded after their expiration date.  Urine pH: Urine pH is typically acidic in dogs and cats and alkaline in horses and ruminants, but varies depending on diet, medications, or presence of disease. Reagent strip colorimetric test pads for pH determination are accurate to within ~0.5 pH units. For example, a reading of 6.5 means the actual pH is likely to be between 6.0 and 7.0. Portable pH meters are more accurate than pH colorimetric test pads. A bacterial urinary tract infection with a urease-producing microbe will result in alkaluria. Urine pH will affect crystalluria because some crystals, such as struvite, form in alkaline urine, whereas other crystals, such as cystine, form in acidic urine.  Protein: The protein test pad uses a color indicator (tetrabromophenol blue), which detects primarily albumin in urine. Results range from 10 mg/dL to 1,000 mg/dL. Proteinuria can occur from prerenal (fever, strenuous exercise, seizures, extreme environmental temperature, and hyperproteinemia), renal (primarily glomerular and occasionally tubular disease), or postrenal (inflammation, hemorrhage, and infection) causes. A positive reaction must be interpreted in light of SG, pH, and urine sediment examination. For example, a trace amount of protein in concentrated urine is less significant than a trace amount of protein in dilute urine. Alkaluria will give a false-positive reaction. Likewise, presence of other proteins, such as Bence-Jones proteins, will give false-negative results. Proteinuria can be measured using sulfosalicylic acid precipitation, which detects albumin and globulins; however, it is not accurate in dogs and cats. If proteinuria is present with an inactive urine sediment, its significance can be verified and quantitated by dividing the urine protein concentration by the urine creatinine concentration (urine protein to urine creatinine ratio [UP:UC]). Interpretation of a UP:UC is as follows: < 0.5:1 (dogs) and < 0.4:1 (cats) is normal, 0.4 or 0.5–1:1 is questionable, and >1:1 is abnormal. With primary renal azotemia, a UP:UC >0.5:1 in dogs and >0.4:1 in cats is considered abnormal. A semiquantitative microalbuminuria test is available to detect urinary albumin in the range of 1–30 mg/dL. It uses ELISA technology specific for canine or feline albumin. Because of minor species differences in albumin, there are different kits for dogs and cats. The microalbuminuria test detects lower concentrations of albumin than a standard dipstick test pad. Hematuria must be macroscopic to increase the microalbuminuria or UP:UC; however, pyuria increases both.  Glucose: Glucose is detected by a glucose oxidase enzymatic reaction that is specific for glucose. Glucosuria is not present normally because the renal threshold for glucose is >180 mg/dL in most species and >240 mg/dL in cats. With euglycemia, the amount of filtered glucose is less than the renal threshold, and all of the filtered glucose is reabsorbed in the proximal renal tubules. Glucosuria can result from hyperglycemia (due to diabetes mellitus, excessive endogenous or exogenous glucocorticoids, hepatocutaneous syndrome, or stress) or from a proximal renal tubular defect (such as primary renal glucosuria or Fanconi syndrome). If glucosuria is present, blood glucose concentration should be determined. False-negative results can occur with high urinary concentrations of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) or with formaldehyde (a metabolite of the urinary antiseptic, methenamine, which may be used for prevention of bacterial urinary tract infections). False-positive results may occur if the sample is contaminated with hydrogen peroxide, chlorine, or hypochlorite (bleach).  Ketones: Ketones are produced from fatty acid metabolism and include acetoacetic acid, acetone, and β-hydroxybutyrate. The ketone test pad detects acetone and acetoacetic acid, but not β-hydroxybutyrate (which can be measured in blood and urine using a point-of-care instrument or a biochemistry analyzer). The test pad contains nitroprusside that reacts with acetoacetic acid and acetone to cause a purple color change; it is more sensitive to acetoacetic acid than acetone. Ketonuria is associated with primary ketosis (ruminants), ketosis secondary to diabetes mellitus (small animals), consumption of low-carbohydrate diets (especially in cats), and occasionally with prolonged fasting or starvation. A false-positive reaction can occur with presence of reducing substances in urine.  Bilirubin/Urobilinogen: When hemoglobin is degraded, the heme portion is converted to bilirubin, which is conjugated in the liver and excreted in bile. Some conjugated bilirubin is filtered by the glomerulus and excreted in urine. In dogs, but not cats, the kidney can metabolize hemoglobin to bilirubin and secrete it. Male dogs have a higher secretory ability than females. Dipstick reagent pads use diazonium salts to create a color change and are more sensitive to conjugated bilirubin than unconjugated bilirubin. Bilirubinuria occurs when conjugated bilirubin exceeds the renal threshold as with liver disease or hemolysis. In dogs with concentrated urine, a small amount of bilirubin can be normal. Pigmenturia and phenothiazine may result in a false-positive reaction; false-negative reactions may occur with large amounts of urinary ascorbic acid (vitamin C).  Urobilinogen, formed from bilirubin by intestinal microflora, is absorbed into the portal circulation and excreted renally. A small amount of urinary urobilinogen is normal. Increased urinary urobilinogen occurs with hyperbilirubinemia; a negative test may be seen with biliary obstruction. However, the test is not specific enough to be clinically useful.  Occult Blood: The occult blood test pad uses a “pseudoperoxidase” method to detect intact RBCs, hemoglobin, and myoglobin. A positive reaction can be due to hemorrhage (hematuria), intravascular hemolysis (hemoglobinuria), or myoglobinuria. The latter two processes can be distinguished by examination of plasma: plasma will appear pink to red after intravascular hemolysis, whereas myoglobin is rapidly cleared from plasma, resulting in clear plasma. As with other colorimetric test pads, discolored urine may yield false-positive results. A positive result should be interpreted with microscopic examination of urine sediment.  Urine Sediment Microscopic examination of urine sediment should be part of a routine urinalysis. For centrifugation, 3–5 mL of urine is transferred to a conical centrifuge tube. Urine is centrifuged at 1,000–1,500 rpm for ~3–5 min. The supernatant is decanted, leaving ~0.5 mL of urine and sediment in the tip of the conical tube. The sediment is resuspended by tapping the tip of the conical tube against the table several times. A few drops of the sediment are transferred to a glass slide, and a cover slip is applied. Examination of unstained urine is recommended for routine samples. Microscopic examination is performed at 100× (for crystals, casts, and cells) and 400× (for cells and bacteria) magnifications. Contrast of the sample is enhanced by closing the iris diaphragm and lowering the condenser of the microscope. Stains such as Sedistain® and new methylene blue can be used to aid in cell identification but may dilute the specimen and introduce artifacts such as stain precipitate and crystals. Use of a modified Wright stain increases the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values for detection of bacteria. For some tests, air dried, stained smears are necessary.  Red Blood Cells: In an unstained preparation, RBCs are small and round and have a slight orange tint and a smooth appearance. Normal urine should contain < 5 RBCs/field at 400× magnification. Increased RBCs in urine (hematuria) indicates hemorrhage somewhere in the urogenital system; however, sample collection by cystocentesis or catheterization may induce hemorrhage.  White Blood Cells: WBCs are slightly larger than RBCs and have grainy cytoplasm. Normal urine should contain < 5 WBCs/field at 400× magnification. Increased WBCs (pyuria) can occur due to inflammation, infection, trauma, or neoplasia. Catheterization or collection of voided urine may introduce a few WBCs from the urogenital tract.  Epithelial Cells: Transitional epithelial cells, a common urine contaminant derived from the bladder and proximal urethra, resemble WBCs but are larger. They have a greater amount of grainy cytoplasm and a round, centrally located nucleus. In a voided urine sample, squamous epithelial cells may be seen. They are large, oval to cuboidal in shape, and may or may not contain a nucleus. Occasionally, neoplastic transitional cells may be seen in an animal with a transitional cell carcinoma. Neoplastic squamous cells may be seen in an animal with a squamous cell carcinoma.  Cylindruria (Casts): Casts are elongated, cylindrical structures formed by mucoprotein congealing within renal tubules and may contain cells. Hyaline casts are pure protein precipitates; they are transparent, have parallel sides and rounded ends, and are composed of mucoprotein. They may occur with fever, exercise, and renal disease. Epithelial cellular casts form from entrapment of sloughed tubular epithelial cells in the mucoprotein; they may be seen with renal tubular disease. Granular casts are thought to represent degenerated epithelial cellular casts. Waxy casts have a granular appearance and are thought to arise from degeneration of longstanding granular casts. They typically have sharp borders with broken ends. Other cellular casts include RBC casts and WBC casts and are always abnormal. RBC casts form because of renal hemorrhage. WBC casts form because of renal inflammation, as with pyelonephritis. Fatty casts are not common but can be seen with disorders of lipid metabolism, such as diabetes mellitus. A few hyaline or granular casts are considered normal. However, presence of cellular casts or other casts in high numbers indicates renal damage, and may be one of the earliest laboratory abnormalities noted with toxic damage to renal epithelial cells (eg, gentamicin, amphotericin B).  Infectious Organisms: The presence of bacteria in urine collected by cystocentesis indicates infection. Small numbers of bacteria from the lower urogenital tract may contaminate voided samples or samples collected by catheterization and do not indicate infection. Bacterial rods are most easily identified in urine sediment. Particles of debris may be mistaken for bacteria. Suspected bacteria can be confirmed by staining urine sediment with Gram stain; however, aerobic culture is best to confirm a bacterial urinary tract infection. Rarely, yeast and fungal hyphae and parasitic ova may be seen in urine sediment. Their presence is not always associated with clinical disease. Parasitic ova observed include those of Stephanurus dentatus, Capillaria plica, C felis, and Dioctophyma renale. Additionally, microfilariae of Dirofilaria immitis may be seen in urine sediment.  Crystals: Many urine sediments contain crystals. The type of crystal present depends on urine pH, concentration of crystallogenic materials, urine temperature, and length of time between urine collection and examination. Crystalluria is not synonymous with urolithiasis and is not necessarily pathologic. Furthermore, uroliths may form without observed crystalluria. Many urine samples are examined at room temperature, which may alter the number of crystals present, and the result may not represent the situation in vivo.  Struvite crystals are commonly seen in canine and feline urine. Struvite crystalluria in dogs is not a problem unless there is a concurrent bacterial urinary tract infection with a urease-producing microbe. Without an infection, struvite crystals in dogs are not associated with struvite urolith formation. However, some animals (eg, cats) do form struvite uroliths without a bacterial urinary tract infection. In these animals, struvite crystalluria may be pathologic. Struvite crystals appear typically as “coffin-lids” or “prisms”; however, they may be amorphous.  Calcium oxalate crystalluria occurs less commonly in dogs and cats. If persistent, it may indicate an increased risk of calcium oxalate urolith formation, which has been increasing in some countries throughout the past few years. ( See also page Urolithiasis in Horses and feline interstitial cystitis.) However, calcium oxalate and calcium carbonate crystalluria is common in healthy horses and cattle. Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals appear as squares with an “X” in the middle, or “envelope-shaped.” Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals are “dumb-bell” shaped. An unusual form of calcium oxalate crystals is typically seen in association with ethylene glycol toxicity ( see Ethylene Glycol Toxicosis). These crystals are found in neutral to acidic urine. They are small, flat, and colorless and are shaped like “picket fence posts.”  Ammonium acid urate crystals suggest liver disease (eg, portosystemic shunt). These crystals occur in acidic urine and are yellow-brown spheres with irregular, spiny projections; however, they may also be amorphous. Certain species, such as birds and reptiles, and certain breeds of dogs, specifically Dalmatians, can normally have ammonium acid urate crystalluria.  Cystine crystals are six-sided and of variable size. They are seen in acidic urine. Presence of cystine crystals represents a proximal tubular defect in amino acid reabsorption. Cystinuria has been reported in many breeds of dogs and rarely in cats. Dachshunds, Newfoundlands, English Bulldogs, and Scottish Terriers have a high incidence of cystine urolithiasis.  Bilirubin crystals occur with bilirubinuria; however, they may be normal in small numbers in dogs.  Lipids: Fat droplets are commonly present in urine from dogs and cats and may be mistaken for RBCs. They often vary in size and tend to float on a different plane of focus than the remainder of the sediment. They are not considered to be pathologic.  Spermatozoa: Spermatozoa may be seen normally in urine collected from reproductively intact male dogs.  Plant Material: Occasionally, plant material may be seen in urine samples collected by voiding. When present, they indicate contamination of the urine sample and are not pathologic.  Bladder Tumor Antigen Test The bladder tumor antigen test can be used to screen for transitional cell carcinoma in dogs. The results are not specific for transitional cell carcinoma, and non-neoplastic disease (eg, urinary tract infections, hematuria, etc) can give positive results. A negative test, however, is meaningful in that a transitional cell carcinoma is not likely to be present. This test may be useful for routine screening of dogs at higher risk of developing transitional cell carcinoma (eg, Scottish terriers) that do not have other signs or laboratory findings of lower urinary tract disease. This tests for the presence of basement membrane fragments and is a color reaction using a commercial test kit. Serologic Test Kits ByTrevor J. Whitbread, BVSc, DECVP, Abbey Veterinary Services/NationWide Laboraties; Karen W. Post, DVM, MS, DACVM, North Carolina Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory System, Consumer Services, Rollins Animal Disease, Diagnostic Laboratory;Charles M. Hendrix, DVM, PhD, Department of Pathobiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Auburn University Reviewed/Revised Jun 2015 | Modified Sept 2024 Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV): | Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV): | Canine Parvovirus (CPV): | Canine Distemper Virus (CDV): | Borrelia burgdorferi: | Ehrlichia canis: | Brucella canis: | Heartworm Antigen—Dogs: | Heartworm Antibody and Antigen—Cats: | Canine and Feline Pregnancy Diagnosis—Relaxin: | Canine and Feline Luteinizing Hormone—Ovulation Timing and Ovariectomy Status: | Canine Ovulation Timing—Progesterone: | Thyroxine: | Foal Immunoglobulin (IgG): | Calf Immunoglobulin: In-house serologic test kits continue to improve in reliability, ease of use, and types available. They include tests for infectious disease by measuring either antigens or antibodies. Antibody levels can also be measured to establish the presence of adequate protection to an infectious agent. However, these levels are not an absolute measure of protection. High serum antibody levels do not always confer protection, and low levels do not always indicate susceptibility to infection. The level of cell-mediated immunity is also important. Measurement of hormone levels also use serologic tests. Many of these tests are ELISA that may be microwell or membrane-based, but other types, including immunomigration, immunochromatography, and agglutination tests, are also available. Sample requirements may be plasma, serum, whole blood, feces, or saliva, depending on the test format.  Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV): Serologic testing for FeLV is important to identify infected cats and prevent transmission of the virus ( see Feline Leukemia Virus). Testing is also recommended before vaccination against FeLV, because vaccination of infected cats will not limit development or transmission of disease. Most currently available in-house diagnostic kits are designed to detect soluble FeLV-specific gag protein p 27, which is produced in large amounts during viremia. The time between infection and the presence of detectable antigen varies but is likely to be within 28–30 days. Vaccination against FeLV will not yield a positive test result when antigen tests are used, nor will the presence of maternally derived antibodies in kittens. Testing serum, plasma, or whole blood is considered more reliable than testing saliva or tears. Most test kits have positive and negative controls incorporated into the kit, so technical problems with running the test may be detected.  A negative result on a screening test is very reliable; however, false-positive results may occur with the tests of soluble antigen, especially in a population of cats with a low incidence of disease. A true positive result may reflect either transient or persistent viremia, so clinical decisions should not be based on a single test result. Confirmation of positive results, especially in asymptomatic cats, should be pursued by additional testing such as soluble antigen testing using a kit from a different manufacturer or immunofluorescent antigen testing on blood or bone marrow. Cats with discordant results should be retested using both test methods in 60 days and should probably be considered potentially infective until their status is clarified.  Some cats previously thought to have cleared infection have been identified using real-time PCR, which is a very sensitive method to detect cell-associated FeLV proviral DNA or viral RNA. These cats are proviral DNA positive but FeLV antigen negative and are unlikely to shed virus or develop clinical disease. However, proviral FeLV could be transmitted in blood transfusions, so potential feline blood donors should be PCR negative for FeLV.  Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV): Because the concentration of FIV antigen in the blood of infected cats is often very low, in-house diagnostic tests are designed to detect anti-FIV antibodies rather than antigen. Test kits yield a positive or negative result for antibody rather than a titer. Antibodies usually develop within 60 days of infection, but this period is quite variable, and a few infected cats do not develop detectable antibody levels. Once present, antibodies appear to be present for >2 yr, except for those transiently detectable in kittens that have maternally derived antibodies. A kitten < 6 mo of age that tests positive should be retested after 6 mo of age for this reason. If the test is still positive, the kitten is most likely infected.  With the currently available ELISA in-house test kits, sensitivity is high. However, these tests cannot distinguish between antibodies produced in response to vaccination with FIV vaccine and those produced by natural infection. An ELISA test that appears to successfully discriminate between antibodies produced in response to vaccination and those produced in natural infections has been developed but is not available for commercial use. A reasonable approach is to use the in-house test as a screening test. A negative result is a fairly reliable indicator that the cat is not infected. Positive results, especially in asymptomatic cats, should be confirmed by another test such as Western blot if available. Kittens born to vaccinated queens are antibody-positive for a variable length of time.  Canine Parvovirus (CPV): Both ELISA and immunomigration test kits are available for detection of CPV antigen in feces. These tests are fairly specific for the virus, but dogs that have been recently vaccinated may transiently shed antigens detected by the test kits. The sensitivity is somewhat lower for several reasons. Fecal shedding occurs for only ~7–10 days, beginning on day 3–5 after exposure, so virus is not always detectable in dogs with clinical signs. Blood in the feces as well as the formation of antigen-antibody complexes, with antibodies from the blood or exudate present in the gut, may be associated with false-negative results. It appears that in-house test kits may have decreased sensitivity to the new CPV2c strain.  Although in-house test kits for diagnosis of CPV are not licensed for use in cats, several studies have shown they can be used to detect feline panleukopenia virus in cat feces. The specificity and sensitivity are not known. Some cats test positive after vaccination, even when inactivated virus vaccines are used.  In-house tests for assay of anti-CPV antibodies have become available to evaluate the need for revaccination and the presence of possibly interfering maternal antibodies. These tests are not intended to diagnose parvovirus infection and do not distinguish between natural exposure and vaccine-induced antibodies. Currently available test kits include ELISA and immunochromatographic tests. They are semiquantitative and use color changes in positive control wells compared with color changes in samples to determine relative antibody levels. The level of anti-CPV antibody protective against infection is not known, but results are interpreted based on protective titers measured by other methods. PCR is widely available for detection of virus in feces.  Canine Distemper Virus (CDV): In-house test kits for determination of antibodies to CDV are available, usually in combination with canine parvovirus antibody testing. These tests are semiquantitative ELISA for anti-canine distemper IgG in serum or plasma. They may be used to evaluate the need for revaccination and to determine the level of maternal antibody present in puppies. They are less useful for diagnosis of infection with CDV. An immunochromatography-based assay for CDV antigen has been developed and has good sensitivity and specificity, especially when conjunctival swabs are the sample used; sensitivity and specificity are somewhat less for blood and nasal swabs. This assay is not currently available as an in-house test kit.  Borrelia burgdorferi: Lyme disease ( see Lyme Borreliosis) is caused by the tickborne spirochete B burgdorferi. In general, diagnostic tests for this infection have had several potential problems, including relatively high levels of positive results in clinically healthy animals, persistence of antibodies after apparent resolution of clinical disease, interpretation of antibody titers in vaccinated dogs, and the fact that detectable antibody may not be present until 4–6 wk after exposure. An in-clinic ELISA test kit for detection of anti–B burgdorferi antibodies in serum or plasma minimizes some of these problems by using a synthetic peptide (C6) based on a conserved B burgdorferi–specific protein. This protein is important in inducing a humoral immune response by 3–5 wk after natural infection in dogs. Vaccination does not induce a cross-reactive immune response to this antigen, so assays using the C6 protein are able to distinguish vaccine-induced antibodies from those produced in response to natural infections. C6-based assays are also more specific than previous tests, because there is no cross-reactivity with other tickborne agents or with autoimmune antibodies.  A currently available in-house test assay for anti–B burgdorferi antibodies is a screening test that gives only a positive or negative result and is thus not quantitative. Although licensed for dogs, this test kit also has been validated in cats and horses. Quantitative assays, performed in reference laboratories, can be used to monitor treatment efficacy (ie, detection of decreasing antibody titers), but these results are not always conclusive.  Ehrlichia canis: Canine ehrlichiosis ( see Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, and Related Infections in Animals) is a tickborne disease caused by one of several species of Ehrlichia. It can be associated with thrombocytopenia, anemia, and neutropenia as well as other nonspecific clinical signs. Although identification of Ehrlichia morulae in leukocytes can be diagnostic for this infection, serologic assay for detection of antibodies is more common and has better sensitivity. In-house tests for ehrlichiosis are either qualitative (giving only a positive or negative result) or semiquantitative tests for antibodies to E canis. Those currently available are ELISA to be performed on serum, plasma, or whole blood. The test kits use either recombinant analogues of major outer membrane proteins of E canis or whole E canis proteins as the antigen. The different Ehrlichia species stimulate antibodies that appear to cross-react in these assays, for the most part. Because anti−E canis antibodies may be very long-lived and may be present in subclinical infections, detection of these antibodies does not distinguish between exposure and Ehrlichia-induced illness and cannot reliably indicate success of response to therapy.  Brucella canis: B canis is not a problem in some countries, and tests are not always readily available. However, infection may be subclinical, or it may cause a variety of clinical signs, including abortion, infertility, and discospondylitis ( see Brucellosis in Dogs). Infection most often occurs during mating; thus, testing of breeding animals is important in disease prevention. A rapid slide agglutination test that includes a 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) step to reduce false-positive results by eliminating nonspecific IgM reactions is available as an in-house diagnostic kit. This assay detects serum antibody to surface antigens of the bacteria. Reports of sensitivity and specificity of this test vary depending on the confirmatory test used. ELISA and immunochromatographic assays have been developed for qualitative and semiquantitative tests for anti–B canis antibodies. Positive results obtained using any of these test kits should be confirmed with PCR or blood culture.  Heartworm Antigen—Dogs: Serologic testing for heartworm antigen in dogs is more sensitive than screening for microfilaremia and, in addition, can detect occult infections. Heartworm antigen is first detectable at ~5 mo after infection and will usually precede microfilaremia by a few weeks; however, this time frame may be shifted later in animals on macrocyclic lactone preventives and those with low numbers of worms. Antigen test formats available include ELISA and immunochromatographic assays. Serum or plasma may be used in all kits, and some may be performed using whole blood. Some test kits can be stored at room temperature, whereas others must be stored refrigerated and brought to room temperature before use. Batch testing and single sample testing are both available. All of the test kits have very high specificity. False-positive results are most often due to technical problems such as inadequate washing or failure to read the results at the optimal time. Manufacturer’s instructions should be closely followed with any of the test formats.  Sensitivity varies from one test to another and is affected by worm load, worm gender (a female antigen is detected, thus male-only infections will not be detected), and maturity of female worms. None of these tests has 100% sensitivity. When unexpected false results are obtained on an antigen test, additional testing, using a different format, is recommended.  After adulticide treatment, antigenemia should become undetectable by 6 mo. However, it can take more than a month for some adult heartworms to die, so a positive antigen test at 5–6 mo after treatment does not necessarily indicate treatment failure. The test should be repeated 2–3 mo later.  Heartworm Antibody and Antigen—Cats: Heartworm disease in cats is substantially different from the disease in dogs, and recommendations for serologic testing are consequently different. Cats tend to have a much lower worm burden—often only one or two worms. Cats also have single-sex infections more frequently than do dogs. Circulating microfilaremia is rare in cats, and microfilariae have a shorter life span. These differences are often attributed to a more effective feline immune response to heartworm infection. However, heartworms can cause serious disease in cats.  Heartworm antigen tests are less sensitive for detection of infection in cats than they are in dogs, with a reported sensitivity of 50%–80%. Therefore, a negative antigen test does not exclude heartworm infection. Antibody testing is also available and can be useful as a screening test, but the presence of antibody does not confirm feline heartworm disease. Transient exposure to larvae will stimulate production of antibody; many early infections are cleared spontaneously, and adult heartworms never develop. A combination of testing for both heartworm antigen and anti-heartworm antibody results in much higher sensitivity and specificity than using either test method alone. Combination testing is warranted in cats with clinical signs of heartworm disease when results of a single test are not conclusive.  Test kits for detection of heartworm antigen and anti-heartworm antibody in cats are marketed in several formats. These can use either plasma or serum and are qualitative or semiquantitative.  Canine and Feline Pregnancy Diagnosis—Relaxin: The only known pregnancy-specific hormone in the bitch and queen is relaxin, which is produced by the placenta when a fertilized egg is implanted. Relaxin is first detectable in the plasma around day 20–25 after fertilization. It is not present in pseudopregnant or nonpregnant bitches or queens. Relaxin levels peak by approximately day 40–50 of gestation and drop at parturition, but they may remain detectable for up to 50 days during lactation. In-clinic test kits to measure relaxin include microwell ELISA and immunomigration qualitative tests requiring serum, plasma, or whole blood. The assays appear to have very good specificity, ie, a detectable level of relaxin is not found in nonpregnant animals. False-negative results have been reported in some bitches carrying very small litters or in those with one or more nonviable puppies.  Canine and Feline Luteinizing Hormone—Ovulation Timing and Ovariectomy Status: In the bitch, serum luteinizing hormone (LH) is normally present in very low levels except for a dramatic rise just before ovulation. Ovulation occurs 2 days after this LH surge, and the LH level returns to baseline within 24–40 hr of peaking. Serum progesterone levels begin to rise at the time of the LH surge. A bitch will be fertile between 4–7 days after the LH surge, with the most fertile period on days 5 and 6. In addition, the LH surge determines the gestation period, with parturition occurring between day 64 and 66 after the surge. The LH surge may occur anywhere from 3 days before to 5 days after the onset of estrous behavior, so it cannot be reliably predicted by behavior.  Ovulation timing by measurement of LH requires daily testing, which usually begins when >50% of vaginal epithelial cells are cornified, based on vaginal cytology. There is occasionally a false LH peak not followed by ovulation, but it will also not be followed by an increase in progesterone. For that reason, assays of both LH and progesterone are recommended for most accurate ovulation detection. An increased LH concentration not followed by increased progesterone levels is considered a proestrus fluctuation, and testing for ovulation should continue.  A currently available in-clinic kit to measure LH concentrations in serum is essentially qualitative, with a serum level of < 1 ng/mL being read as negative and a level of >1 ng/mL considered positive. The test is an immunochromatographic assay.  Ovariectomized bitches and queens have serum concentrations of LH >1 ng/mL. Because this LH concentration is also seen in intact bitches about to ovulate, a single high LH concentration does not confirm reproductive status, but a low LH concentration indicates a nonovariectomized animal.  Canine Ovulation Timing—Progesterone: Serum progesterone begins to increase after the LH surge with a modest increase on the day before ovulation and a further increase to 4–10 ng/mL on the day of ovulation. Progesterone continues to increase and stays increased throughout pregnancy or diestrus. As the rise in progesterone is more constant compared with LH, daily testing is not necessary. It is recommended that testing begin in late proestrus and continue every 2–3 days until a high range is reached, indicating ovulation.  The test kits for in-clinic progesterone testing are semiquantitative ELISA with preovulatory concentrations designated according to the kit used. Some kits are designed to give two additional progesterone ranges (intermediate and high), whereas others indicate only preovulatory and “ovulatory day or later” levels. In comparison with other test methods, the in-house test kits are less accurate, particularly in the range of roughly 1.5–10 ng/mL, which is the range of interest for earliest detection of ovulation. Accuracy is greater at higher progesterone levels. As mentioned above, measurement of both LH and progesterone is recommended for most accurate breeding management.  Thyroxine: Assay of total serum thyroxine (T4) may be used as a screening test for canine hypothyroidism or as a diagnostic test for feline hyperthyroidism. (Also see The Thyroid Gland.) In addition, T4 concentrations are measured when monitoring therapy for hypo- or hyperthyroidism. An in-house ELISA test kit, which uses an additional instrument to read results, provides semiquantitative information about T4 concentration in canine and feline sera. The assay is run at one of two “dynamic ranges,” depending on the predicted range of results. Published studies comparing this assay with other test methods for T4 vary in their conclusions. It is recommended that T4 concentrations be periodically measured in stored pooled serum of cats and dogs to monitor whether assay performance is consistent. It is probably still better to use a commercial laboratory for thyroxine measurement.  Almost all (99%) of total T4 is bound to protein in the blood and therefore not biologically accurate. Free T4 levels are a more accurate test of thyroid function in cats and dogs.  Foal Immunoglobulin (IgG): Measurement of foal serum IgG concentration within the first 24 hr after birth can be useful in preventing disease related to failure of passive transfer of IgG in colostrum from mare to foal. Use of foal-side testing procedures can facilitate prompt diagnosis and treatment. A foal serum IgG level of >800 mg/dL is generally considered optimal, with < 200 mg/dL indicating failure of passive transfer. Concentrations of 200–800 mg/dL are considered evidence of partial transfer.  Although radial immunodiffusion is considered the most accurate test for IgG concentration, it takes much longer (5–24 hr) than many of the other test methods and thus is not as useful as an indicator of the need for therapeutic intervention. More rapid screening tests include the zinc sulfate turbidity test, glutaraldehyde clot test, and ELISA test kits.  The zinc sulfate test estimates IgG in serum based on its precipitation when added to a zinc-containing solution. Turbidity generally becomes visible when IgG levels are 400–500 mg/dL. This test takes ~1 hr and may be performed with zinc sulfate solutions made in the clinic, or reagents for the test may be purchased as a test kit.  The glutaraldehyde clot test requires the addition of 1 volume of serum to 10 volumes of 10% glutaraldehyde and examination of the tubes at timed intervals up to 60 min. The presence of IgG in the serum causes a solid clot to form in the tube. Clot formation in < 10 min generally correlates to an IgG concentration of >800 mg/dL, whereas a positive reaction within 60 min is interpreted as an IgG concentration of >400 mg/dL. Both of these test methods use serum, rather than plasma, so time for the blood to clot and separation of serum must be added to the time needed to perform the test.  ELISA test kits for in-house or foal-side testing can use either serum or whole blood as the sample and take ~10 min. Most are semiquantitative, with color changes corresponding to IgG concentrations of < 400 mg/dL, 400–800 mg/dL, or >800 mg/dL. One quantitative handheld colorimetric immunoassay is currently available.  Reports of sensitivity and specificity among these methods vary. In general, sensitivity in identifying foals with IgG concentrations < 400 mg/dL appears to be acceptable for all methods. Thus, there are few foals with total failure of passive transfer that would not be identified by any of these methods. Specificity is less acceptable for some of the methods, and treatment of some foals that did not need it might be instituted based on the results.  Calf Immunoglobulin: Measurement of IgG concentration in neonatal calf serum is important for the same reasons described for foals. However, IgG levels in calves are different from those in foals, with >1,000 mg/dL considered evidence of adequate passive transfer and < 1,000 mg/dL indicating failure of passive transfer. Radial immunodiffusion is the gold standard for accurate measurement of serum IgG in calves (as in foals), but the length of time required to complete this assay makes it less useful than other methods. Other methods include zinc sulfate and sodium sulfite turbidity tests, glutaraldehyde coagulation test, measurement of total serum solids by refractometry, and a lateral flowthrough ELISA test kit.  The sodium sulfite and zinc sulfate turbidity tests are both based on the precipitation of high-molecular-weight proteins in these solutions. Serum is used as the sample, and tests are read after 15–30 min of incubation. Results of these tests vary in sensitivity and specificity depending on the endpoint chosen, and technical difficulties with reagents can decrease test performance. The glutaraldehyde clot test is performed as in foals, with no clot formation at 60 min indicating failure of passive transfer.  Measurement of serum total protein by refractometer is a fairly reliable indicator of adequate passive transfer in healthy, well-hydrated calves. A level of 5.2 g/dL is roughly equivalent to an IgG concentration of 1,000 mg/dL.  A commercially available ELISA test kit uses serum as the sample and takes ~20 min. The assay is qualitative in that it indicates an IgG concentration of >1,000 mg/dL or < 1,000 mg/dL. Sensitivity and specificity are reasonably good, and this test is less influenced by factors such as calf dehydration or reagent instability than some other methods. Manufacturer recommendations for storing and using the kits must be followed. Parasitology in Veterinary Practice ByGary Conboy, DVM, PhD, DACVM-Parasit, Atlantic Veterinary College, Department of Pathology and Microbiology Reviewed ByAngel Abuelo, DVM, PhD, DABVP, DECBHM, FHEA, MRCVS, Michigan State University, College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed/Revised May 2025 Internal Parasite (Endoparasite) Diagnosis in Small Animals | Internal Parasite (Endoparasite) Diagnosis in Horses and Production Animals | External Parasite (Ectoparasite) Examination in Small Animals and Production Animals | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (7) Tables (0) Videos (0) Internal Parasite (Endoparasite) Diagnosis in Small Animals Antemortem diagnosis of endoparasitic infections in small animals usually results from the detection of immature stages of the parasites that can be present in feces, urine, saliva-sputum, or blood.   Fecal examination makes up a large part of laboratory diagnostic testing for parasitic infection. Detection of a wide range of endoparasites infecting small animals is possible through the use of various fecal examination techniques.   Fecal examination techniques are noninvasive and relatively inexpensive, making them among the most cost-effective diagnostic tests available. Fecal samples should be as fresh as possible.  Dog owners should be instructed to submit only samples collected immediately after deposit (to be certain the sample came from their own dog).  Cat owners should clean the litter box and then collect the next available sample.  Samples should be collected in leakproof, sealable plastic containers. If samples cannot be submitted within 2 hours of collection, they should be refrigerated at 4°C.   Samples exposed to soil or grass for extended lengths of time are unsuitable because they could have been invaded by free-living nematodes.   Samples incubated at room temperature for > 6 hours are unsuitable because it takes < 6 hours for helminth eggs to develop and hatch and for protozoal trophozoites or cysts to degrade.   Immature parasite stages can be sporadically shed in the feces of an infected animal. Therefore, for animals showing clinical signs that suggest parasitic infection, a single negative fecal examination result is insufficient to rule out parasitism.   To rule out parasitism, examinations should be conducted on three samples collected either on consecutive days or over 7–10 days.  Pearls & Pitfalls  To rule out parasitism, examinations should be conducted on three samples collected either on consecutive days or over 7–10 days.  False-positive results are possible with all of the fecal examination methods because of coprophagia (dogs) and hunting (cats, dogs).  A dog that ingests feces containing helminth eggs, protozoal cysts, or nematode larvae from an infected animal will shed those parasites in its feces over the next several days.  A cat or dog that hunts will shed in its feces the immature stages of any parasite that is in a prey animal it eats for several days after feeding on that animal.  Examination of Feces for Internal Parasite Diagnosis in Small Animals The most widely used fecal examination methods are simple flotation and centrifugal flotation. Other methods include direct smear, simple sedimentation, Baermann examination, and ELISA. Each of these additional methods is preferred for certain indications, as detailed below.  Simple Fecal Flotation Simple flotation is often done with commercial kits (see simple fecal flotation kit image), in which a small amount of feces is mixed with a high-specific-gravity (1.18–1.33) salt or sugar flotation solution in a chamber. The specific instructions for the commercial kit should be followed. In general, the instructions for these kits are a variation of the following:  A small amount of feces is placed in the bottom of the chamber.  The chamber is half filled with flotation medium.  The insert is placed in the chamber and rotated back and forth one-quarter turn for 20–30 seconds to mix the feces with the flotation medium.  The insert is firmly snapped into place in the chamber.  The chamber is completely filled with flotation medium to form a positive meniscus.  A coverslip or slide is added on top.  The sample is allowed to sit for 5–10 minutes. The parasite stages are concentrated as they float up to the surface of the flotation medium and attach to the slide or coverslip.  The coverslip is then placed on a glass slide and examined under the microscope using the 10X objective to identify the parasites.  Simple fecal flotation kit   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Centrifugal Fecal Flotation Detection sensitivity of fecal flotation is greatly improved if centrifugation is added (see centrifuge image). In general, centrifugal flotation is far superior to simple flotation for detecting parasites. The most dramatic example is the detection of the bipolar-plugged eggs of whipworms or capillarids.  Pearls & Pitfalls  In general, centrifugal flotation is far superior to simple flotation for detecting parasites.  Fecal flotation tubes in centrifuge   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Centrifugal flotation is conducted as follows:  Approximately 1 teaspoon of feces (3–5 g) is mixed in flotation medium, sieved through cheesecloth or a tea strainer, poured into a test tube, and centrifuged at 650 g for 10 minutes.  Flotation medium is then added to completely fill the test tube (forming a positive meniscus),  A coverslip is added, and the sample is allowed to sit for 5–20 minutes.  The coverslip is placed on a microscope slide, and the entire area under the coverslip is systematically examined, using the 10X objective of a compound microscope.  Most helminth eggs and protozoal cysts are detected by centrifugal flotation (see dog sample and sheep sample images). Protozoal trophozoites, nematode larvae, spirurid eggs, acanthocephalan eggs, and operculate eggs (trematodes, Diphyllobothrium spp, Spirometra mansonoides) are not reliably detected by flotation methods.  Pearls & Pitfalls  Protozoal trophozoites, nematode larvae, spirurid eggs, acanthocephalan eggs, and operculate eggs are not reliably detected by flotation methods.  Centrifugal fecal flotation sample, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Centrifugal fecal flotation sample, sheep   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Various flotation media are available for use. Sugar flotation medium has the advantage of not crystallizing as readily as salt solutions do; therefore, slides prepared with sugar medium can be stored for a few days in the refrigerator if there is a need to reexamine the slide or consult with a colleague.  For use in small animal diagnostics, centrifugal flotation using zinc sulfate (ZnSO4; specific gravity 1.18) is considered the best option for detecting Giardia duodenalis cysts.  Direct Smear The simplest and most inexpensive fecal examination test is the direct smear. A tiny speck of feces (on the end of an applicator stick) is mixed in a drop of saline solution on a microscope slide, and the slide is examined under a microscope. Care must be taken not to mix in too much fecal matter (print should be easily visible through the preparation if placed on a book). Turning down (partially closing) the condenser on the microscope helps decrease brightness and increases contrast, typically making it easier to see unstained parasite ova or trophozoites.  Direct smear is the method of choice for detecting protozoal trophozoites such as G duodenalis and Tritrichomonas blagburni. When these parasites are suspected, direct smears should be done on very fresh feces (within 20 minutes of deposit) because the trophozoites die and become unrecognizable very quickly after feces are passed by an infected animal.  All of the parasites listed above that are not reliably detected by centrifugal flotation can be diagnosed by direct smear; however, false-negative results are common because such a small amount of feces is examined.  Simple Sedimentation Simple sedimentation is the method of choice for detecting operculate eggs. The test is simple to set up but relatively time-consuming to perform:  A small amount of fecal matter (1–2 g) is mixed with water and passed through a coarse sieve (cheesecloth or tea strainer).  The fecal-water solution is poured into a test tube and left to stand upright in a rack for 5 minutes.  The supernatant is poured off, the tube is refilled with clean water, the sediment is resuspended by stirring with an applicator, and the tube is left to stand for another 5 minutes.  This sequence is repeated a third time, during which the supernatant is poured off and the small amount of remaining fluid and sediment are examined microscopically (several drops placed on a slide with a coverslip added).  Because of the time required to examine a sedimentation sample, this test should be reserved for cases in which an animal has clinical signs that suggest infection with a parasite that has eggs not reliably detected by centrifugal flotation.  Simple sedimentation is the method of choice for the operculate eggs of trematodes (Alaria spp, Cryptocotyle lingua, Nanophyetus salmincola, Paragonimus kellicotti, Platynosomum illiciens) and pseudophyllidean cestodes (Diphyllobothrium spp, S mansonoides).  When infection by the blood fluke Heterobilharzia americana is suspected, saline solution must be used instead of water for the sedimentation procedure. Water induces the eggs to hatch and release the ciliated miracidia, which would be lost with the supernatant, giving false-negative test results.  Simple sedimentation is also recommended for detecting the eggs of spirurid worms (Physaloptera spp) or acanthocephalans (eg, Onicola canis), neither of which are reliably detected by flotation methods.  Baermann Examination Baermann examination is the method of choice for detecting nematode larvae (ie, lungworms and Strongyloides stercoralis). The test is simple to set up; however, accurate identification of nematode larvae tends to be challenging.  Extra care must be taken to ensure that the client has collected only fresh samples (ie, fecal matter collected and submitted within 2 hours of deposit or refrigerated immediately after collection and stored for no longer than 2–3 days before submission). In addition, the shedding of larvae in feces tends to be sporadic in animals infected with lungworms, increasing the chances of a false-negative result. Therefore, three Baermann examinations of samples collected on 3 consecutive days or every 2–3 days might be necessary to detect infections.  Baermann examination requires a glass funnel with tubing attached, a clamp, a funnel rack, cheesecloth, and hot tap water (see Baermann examination setup image):  With the clamp securely in place and closing off the tubing, the funnel is half-filled with hot tap water (not too hot to touch without gloves).  Approximately 10–20 g of fresh feces is placed in a double layer of cheesecloth, and an applicator stick is pushed through the cheesecloth corners to form a sling around the fecal sample.  The cheesecloth-wrapped sample is placed in the water and left to sit for at least 8 hours.  With care taken not to spill any of the first drops, the clamp is gently released, and the fluid is caught in a 15-mL test tube.  The tube is centrifuged (650 g, 10 minutes), the supernatant is discarded, and the few remaining drops and sediment are examined by placing a drop on a microscope slide and adding a coverslip.  Baermann examination setup   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Nematode larvae are usually fairly active, moving vigorously, so they are relatively easy to see under the microscope's 10X objective. Once detected, the larvae should be killed to examine them in detail for accurate identification. The larvae might be killed simply by placing a drop of dilute iodine (approximately the color of tea) at the edge of the coverslip and allowing it to wick across the parasites under the coverslip.  Baermann examination is the method of choice for detecting intestinal infections caused by S stercoralis (in dogs) and cardiorespiratory infections caused by Aelurostrongylus abstrusus (in cats), Angiostrongylus vasorum (in dogs), and Crenosoma vulpis (in dogs).  Baermann examination is not the method of choice for identifying infections caused by Filaroides hirthi or Oslerus osleri in dogs. The larvae of these two pathogens lack the vigor and motility necessary to swim from the fecal sample out into warm water; therefore, they are not reliably detected by Baermann examination.  For F hirthi and O osleri in dogs, microscopic examination of saliva, sputum, or samples from transtracheal wash or bronchoalveolar lavage is recommended instead. Bronchoscopy also can be used to identify the large wartlike nodules of O osleri at the bifurcation of the trachea.  Immunological Tests A commercially available fecal ELISA can be used to test for G duodenalis infection in dogs and cats. It is accurate and more sensitive than a single ZnSO4 centrifugal flotation examination performed by an experienced laboratory diagnostician.  A single ELISA is approximately equivalent to performing three ZnSO4 centrifugal flotation examinations. This ELISA does not require the skill level and experience that are necessary for an accurate morphological diagnosis.  One disadvantage of ELISA is expense: it detects only one pathogen, whereas fecal flotation can detect multiple parasites. In addition, ELISA produces positive results for a prolonged period of time in animals that have been treated, have recovered, and no longer appear to be shedding cysts in the feces. Therefore, it is not suitable for posttreatment monitoring or when a dog must test negative to reenter a canine day care facility.  Pearls & Pitfalls  ELISA remains positive for prolonged periods, so it is not suitable for posttreatment monitoring or when a dog must test negative to reenter a canine day care facility.  In cats with tritrichomoniasis, although the trophozoites of T blagburni are readily detected by direct smear, they cannot be differentiated from those of the nonpathogenic Pentatrichomonas spp. Definitive diagnosis requires the culturing of feces, followed by PCR assay.  Examination of Urine for Internal Parasite Diagnosis in Small Animals The eggs of Pearsonema plica (syn Capillaria plica) and Dioctophyme renale might be detected in the sediment during urinalysis of dogs.  The eggs of P plica are bipolar plugged and contain a single embryo cell. The eggs of D renale have a thick shell wall, are slightly larger, and contain a two-celled embryo.  The bipolar-plugged eggs of Pearsonema feliscati (syn Capillaria feliscati) can be detected in the urine of cats.  Examination of Saliva-Sputum for Internal Parasite Diagnosis in Small Animals See the discussion of F hirthi and O osleri under Baermann Examination above.  Examination of Blood for Internal Parasite Diagnosis in Small Animals Blood samples are examined to detect infection by heartworm (Dirofilaria immitis) and various bloodborne protozoal parasites (eg, Babesia spp, Cytauxzoon felis, Hepatozoon canis).  Testing for Heartworm Currently, both an antigen detection test and a microfilaria test are recommended for the laboratory diagnosis of heartworm infection in dogs.  Various commercial antigen test options are available for detecting D immitis infection in dogs and cats. These tests detect circulating adult female antigens and are recommended for use in animals that were exposed at least 7 months before testing.  The tests are so accurate and sensitive that clinicians can easily forget that both false-negative and false-positive results are still possible. Previously, false-negatives were thought to occur only if the animal was tested too soon after exposure (ie, before 7 months) or if very few female worms were present. It is now recognized that some dogs test negative even when a large worm burden is present, because the antigen can be sequestered in antibody-antigen complexes.  The current recommendation of doing both an antigen test and a microfilaria test achieves the greatest detection sensitivity. The microfilaria tests with the highest detection sensitivity are the modified Knott's test and the filter test. Both tests examine anticoagulated blood, mixed with formalin and dyed with methylene blue, to enable identification of microfilariae on a microscope slide, as outlined here:  Modified Knott's test:  1 mL of anticoagulated blood (EDTA or heparin) is added to 9 mL of 2% formalin in a 15-mL test tube.  The blood is immediately mixed with the formalin by inverting the test tube up and down 5–6 times.  The sample is centrifuged (173 g for 5 minutes).  The supernatant is poured off.  1–2 drops of 0.1% methylene blue are added, and the sediment is resuspended into the dye by stirring with an applicator stick.  The solution is pipetted onto a slide, coverslipped, and examined using the 10X objective of a compound microscope.  The entire volume of the 0.1% methylene blue–sediment mixture is microscopically examined.  Filter test:  1 mL of anticoagulated blood (EDTA or heparin) is added to 9 mL of 2% formalin in a syringe.  The blood is immediately mixed with the formalin by inverting the syringe up and down 5–6 times  The syringe is attached to a filter holder containing a 25-mm filter with a 5-mcm pore size.  The plunger is depressed, pushing the entire mixture through the filter.  The syringe is refilled with water, and the water mixture is pushed through the filter.  The syringe is refilled with air, and the air is pushed through the filter.  The filter holder is unscrewed, and the filter is removed with a forceps and placed on a microscope slide (syringe side up).  One drop of 0.1% methylene blue is added, and the sample is coverslipped and examined using the 10X objective of a compound microscope.  Note that 25–33% of infected dogs have no circulating microfilariae, making the infection undetectable by these tests.  Besides containing D immitis microfilariae, canine blood samples in North America might also contain microfilariae of the nonpathogenic, subcutaneous-dwelling worm Acanthocheilonema reconditum (formerly Dipetalonema reconditum). The microfilariae of D immitis and A reconditum can be differentiated by size and morphology using the modified Knott's test (see Knott's test sample image). They cannot be differentiated with the filter test.  Modified Knott’s test sample, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Gary Conboy.  Less sensitive methods of detection are the direct blood smear (drop of blood placed on a slide, covered with a coverslip, and examined for microfilariae) and the hematocrit tube test (blood is centrifuged, and the buffy coat is examined microscopically as microfilariae migrate into the plasma). In addition, microfilariae can be detected on a dried blood smear stained with Wright-Giemsa stain.  Diagnosis of heartworm infection in cats is based on a combination of the antigen test and an antibody test. The antigen tests are less useful in cats than in dogs because of the lower worm burdens that typically occur in cats.  Available for use in cats, antibody tests detect circulating antibody and therefore detect exposure. Both tests of cats that are currently infected and of cats that have been exposed in the past give positive results. Because infected cats rarely have circulating microfilariae, microfilaria tests are not recommended for use in cats.  Testing for Bloodborne Protozoa The bloodborne protozoal parasites Babesia spp, Cytauxzoon felis, and Hepatozoon canis can be detected on dried, Giemsa-stained hematology blood smears and by immunological and molecular methods.  Parasitemia is the most pronounced in the acute phase of the infection and therefore can be detected on stained blood smears. As infections become more chronic, parasitemia might not be present, necessitating immunological methods (ELISA, immunofluorescence assay, indirect hemagglutination assay) or molecular methods.  Morphological Identification To achieve the expertise necessary for making accurate morphological identification of various immature parasite stages requires a high level of training and experience. A very subjective acquired skill, it requires the ability to recognize and evaluate subtle morphological characteristics. An extremely valuable tool that adds objective data to morphological assessment of parasite stages is an ocular micrometer.  An ocular micrometer is a small scale that fits into the eyepiece of the compound microscope and is calibrated for each objective of the microscope. It allows the user to measure the size of each parasite found on the slide, thereby facilitating accurate characterization and diagnosis. It is relatively inexpensive and can be easily moved to another microscope as needed. Ocular micrometers can be purchased from any microscope dealer.  Internal Parasite (Endoparasite) Diagnosis in Horses and Production Animals Fresh fecal samples from production animals should be collected from pasture, barn, or, preferably, the animal's rectum using plastic gloves. Samples should be placed in a properly identified, sealed specimen jar. Samples > 6 hours old are unsuitable for the same reasons that are stated above for pet fecal sample collection.