PCV Chart
Acute Hemorrhagic Diarrhea Syndrome (AHDS or HGE)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 07, 2025
Published: June 22, 2009
The term hemorrhagic gastroenteritis basically means stomach and intestine inflammation
with bleeding. This kind of bleeding inflammation might be seen in patients with parvovirus
infection, pancreatitis, inflammatory bowel disease, or any number of other conditions.
Still, when the term HGE is used, it usually refers to a more specific canine syndrome and
is an entity in and of itself. To clarify terminology, HGE has been renamed AHDS, which
stands for acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome. You may hear veterinary personnel
using either term.
Acute hemorrhagic diarrhea syndrome is a potentially life-threatening intestinal condition
of an otherwise healthy dog, which manifests as a sudden onset of bloody, watery
diarrhea. The symptoms are extremely dehydrating, often much more than expected from
the amount of diarrhea, and if it is not promptly treated, the dog can go into shock and die.
Vomiting is often part of the syndrome; in fact, 80% of patients experience vomiting
approximately 10 hours before the dramatic bloody diarrhea. Further, the vomiting
contains obvious blood about 50% of the time.
The good news is that with hospitalization and treatment, most dogs recover rapidly. It is
crucial to identify AHDS and rule out other serious conditions promptly so that the dog can
get the correct treatment and the pet's family can have proper expectations.
Smaller dog breeds seem predisposed towards AHDS, though any dog can be
affected. Stress and hyperactivity seem to be predisposing factors.
How is this Condition Diagnosed?
There are no specific tests for AHDS, but a test called a packed cell volume (also called
PCV or hematocrit) helps make the diagnosis. This test can be performed in most
veterinary hospitals using a few drops of blood. The percentage of the blood volume made
up of red blood cells is measured. A normal PCV for a healthy dog would be 37-55%,
meaning 37-55% of the blood volume should be red blood cells; the rest is fluid and white
blood cells. When the patient becomes really dehydrated, there is less fluid in the
bloodstream, and the percentage of blood fluid drops (consequently, the percentage of red
blood cells rises). In other words, the seriously dehydrated patient has a very high PCV.
The average AHDS patient will have a PCV of at least 57%. (It will even be greater
than 60% in approximately 30% of patients.)
The measurement of the PCV also usually includes some measurement of total protein
(sometimes called total solids). In AHDS, the total protein measurement from the blood
sample is paradoxically normal or low.

8/2/25, 11:07 PM Acute Hemorrhagic Diarrhea Syndrome (AHDS or HGE) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952857&ind=162&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Packed cell volume or PCV is measured using a
PCV chart. Photo courtesy MarVista Vet
There are several aspects to the AHDS syndrome,
and they do not all have to be present to make the
diagnosis. The syndrome elements your
veterinarian will be looking for are:
Elevated PCV of 57% or more
Relatively low total protein
At least one episode of vomiting (with or
without blood) approximately 10 hours
before the diarrhea
A watery, very bloody diarrhea that looks
almost like pure blood
Relatively young dog (median age is five years)
Relatively small dog (median size 25 lbs)
Rapid response to intravenous fluids.
As noted, there are many causes of bloody diarrhea like this, including an intestinal
foreign body that requires surgery. Expect your veterinarian to need other tests to rule out
other potentially more serious conditions.
What Causes AHDS?
There are still many unknown factors, but the cause begins with infection from an
intestinal bacterium called Clostridium perfringens Type A. A PCR test for Clostridium
perfringens Type A can be used to determine for sure. This organism produces two toxins
called NET E and NET F, which are different from the usual Clostridial enterotoxin that is
well known to cause diarrhea. The toxin ulcerates the intestinal lining, and the intestinal
blood vessels become permeable to fluid. In this way, fluid is lost into the intestine,
dehydrating the patient, and the PCV rises while the ulcers are responsible for the
bleeding.
Treating AHDS
The heart of therapy is aggressive fluid replacement. The idea is to get the PCV back to
the normal range and keep the patient out of shock. Medication for nausea and pain
control are included as is a low-fat diet as soon as the patient is willing to eat. As dramatic
as the diarrhea is, most patients have an equally dramatic improvement in the first 24
hours of hospitalization and the average dog is out of the hospital after three days total.
Antibiotics are surprisingly controversial in this syndrome, and their use depends on many
patient factors (such as whether or not there is a fever, white blood cell count, whether or
not the expected improvement is achieved, etc).
The stool can be expected to gradually return to normal over about one week.
Probiotics (cultures of healthy bacteria) have been recommended to help repopulate the
bowel with "good" bacteria, which improves the function of the intestines. They may be
recommended for two to four weeks, and your veterinarian will let you know how long to
give them.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952857&pid=19239
da9c6475-a18c-499a-93af-4da5831fed9a.1754156217
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 11:07 PM Acute Hemorrhagic Diarrhea Syndrome (AHDS or HGE) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952857&ind=162&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:07 PM Acute Hemorrhagic Diarrhea Syndrome (AHDS or HGE) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952857&ind=162&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats
Savanna Bruce, Veterinary Student Class of 2024
Reviewed by the Veterinary Team at VIN
Published: July 27, 2021
You’ve spoken with your veterinarian and are thinking about personally making your pet’s
meals. There are about as many diet options for your pet as there are for you, so which
one is best? Breed, age, weight, allergies, medical conditions, and finances are some of
the contributing factors that need to be considered when choosing an alternative diet.
If you decide to home cook your pet’s food, we
highly recommend first consulting with a veterinary
nutritionist to ensure that your pet’s nutritional
needs are adequately met. Once there is a recipe
available, it is important to follow it exactly. Any
changes could affect its nutritional value.
Sometimes, especially in the case of dietary
adverse responses, your veterinarian may
recommend a limited ingredient home-cooked diet.
The purpose is to identify those foods to which your
pet is sensitive; there will be trial and error. When
discussing your pet’s diet history with your
veterinarian, be as thorough as possible to shorten
the time that your pet has to be on a limitedingredient diet. During this period, do not give
anything outside of the specific diet or the results
will not be accurate.
When purchasing foods and/or ingredients, look at the nutrition label, just as you do for
your own food. “Organic” is a USDA certification that refers to how a food is grown and
processed. For example, organic vegetables may be grown without pesticides and organic
meats may come from animals that were allowed to graze or are antibiotic/hormone free.
“Natural” products are those without synthetic ingredients, added coloring, and often are
minimally processed.
A common misconception is that corn is a filler and causes significant allergies in pets.
However, a study was done in 2016 on 297 dogs. Of those, only about four percent had a
corn allergy. Corn is a source of carbohydrates, proteins, vitamins, minerals, fiber, and
fats. Corn provides energy and helps digestion and in most cases is completely fine for
dogs to eat.
“Grain-free” means that the product does not include grains such as rice, corn, or wheat.
Therefore, the source of carbohydrates are peas, legumes, potatoes and/or lentils. Grainfree diets and their possible association with dilated cardiomyopathy (DCM) are
continuously being researched. Caution is advised at this time before making any choices
about grain-free diets.

8/2/25, 11:08 PM Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10390666&ind=163&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Gluten is the protein in grain that is left over after all the starch is removed. Celiac disease
is an intolerance to gluten. Celiac disease in dogs is incredibly rare (as it is in people) and
has not been documented in cats as of November 2019. Dogs reported to have celiac
disease were mainly from a single line of inbred Irish Setters in the United Kingdom.
Unless your dog has a known sensitivity to gluten, there is no need to avoid it in their diet.
Raw pet food is commonly either frozen or freeze-dried. Prepackaged raw diets that are
not marked as complete may need to have vitamin and mineral supplements added to
provide a balanced meal. Do not exclude the parts of the meal that your pet selectively
ignores, as this can also lead to deficiencies and subsequent clinical disease; make sure,
one way or another, that the pet eats all of it. Nutrient deficiencies can occur if a meal is
not made correctly. Bones can potentially cause obstructions, constipation, and tooth
fractures. A real risk of feeding raw food is bacterial contamination, especially by
Salmonella and E. coli. Contamination can affect your pets, healthy humans, and can be
devastatingly harmful to pregnant, young, old, or immunocompromised people in the
house. Raw diets also increase the risk of exposure to parasites. Raw feeding is not
recommended according to the official AVMA position, which strongly discourages raw
feeding.
Some veterinarians recommend that cats be able to eat various foods, including non-dry,
non-kibble food to provide moisture in their diets. If your feline arrives to your home as a
kitten, make sure to feed a variety of foods and textures as kittens will imprint on what
they were fed as kittens. If your feline arrives as an adult, do your best to encourage a
variety of foods. For some medical conditions, feeding an all-canned diet may be
recommended.
Although raw feeding is not recommended, if you have made the decision to feed a raw or
alternative diet, it is time to hit the store! A great way to make consistent meals for your
pet is to print and laminate instructions from your veterinarian and veterinary nutritionist.
You can purchase a cutting board and bowls/plates that are specifically for your furry
friend’s food to lower the risk of cross-contamination. Many people find they can reduce
their costs by purchasing large quantities of each ingredient and storing the meat in a
freezer purchased specifically for pet food. Some butchers understand the needs of pet
owners, and you may be able to arrange with them to have the best possible price.
Dedicate a part of your pantry and fridge to ingredients specifically for your pet; Your pet
will thank you!
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10390666&pid=19239
da9c6475-a18c-499a-93af-4da5831fed9a.1754156298
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:08 PM Alternative Diets for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10390666&ind=163&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Anal Sac Tumors in Dogs
Elizabeth Riley, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Reviewed by the Veterinary Team at VIN
Published: July 22, 2021
If your dog has ever scooted their rear end
across your carpet, they were probably
trying to empty their anal sacs. Humans don’t
have anal sacs that are similar to our pets,
but dogs and cats, along with many other
animals do. A few pets may develop issues
with these sacs, so, what are they?
Anal sacs, also called anal glands, are small
balloon-like structures filled with a brown
liquid known for its repulsively metallic, fishy
smell. Dogs have two anal glands that sit just inside their anus at the 4 and 8 o’clock
positions. When the dog defecates, some of the stinky fluid in these sacs is squeezed out
with the feces. This liquid may play a role in territorial marking and communication among
dogs.
What Are Anal Sac Tumors?
Many problems can affect a dog’s anal sacs, including tumors. Some cancerous anal sac
tumors, known as anal sac adenocarcinomas or apocrine gland anal sac
adenocarcinomas are abnormal, malignant growths of the anal sac. They are uncommon
but serious and can affect any dog but older dogs and certain breeds such as Spaniels,
German Shepherds, and dachshunds are at higher risk.
There are also benign forms of anal sac tumors (not cancerous) called perianal gland
adenomas.
Overall, anal sac tumors can bring illness, discomfort, and a decreased quality of life to
your dog. Thus, it is essential to catch these tumors early, determine what type of tumor
they are, and treat them as soon as possible.
What Causes Anal Sac Tumors?
As with most cancers, a cause has not been identified. However, genetics and
environmental factors likely play important roles.
Although a cause hasn't been pinpointed, there is some understanding of what’s
happening at a microscopic level. Cells in the anal sac start dividing and multiplying in an
uncontrolled manner. This cell division creates a mass that makes the anal sac larger, but
this alone usually doesn’t cause issues, at least until the mass gets quite large.
The larger concern (with adenocarcinomas) is when cancer cells break away and travel to
other parts of the body to make new tumors. These malignant cells often spread to lymph
nodes, which are small lumps of immune tissue scattered throughout the body. They can
also spread to essential organs, such as the lungs, liver, and kidneys.

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anal Sac Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10370944&ind=164&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Another problem with anal sac tumors is that they sometimes increase the amount of
calcium in the blood. High calcium levels can damage the kidneys, which are the organs
that filter blood and make urine. High calcium levels can also disrupt the function of the
nervous system, intestines, and heart. As you might imagine, this disruption can cause a
range of symptoms and issues for your dog.
What Are The Signs of Anal Sac Tumors?
Signs depend on the behavior of the tumor, if it has spread, and where it has spread.
Many dogs won’t show any signs. However, when the tumor spreads to nearby lymph
nodes or the mass gets large, your dog may strain and struggle to defecate or not even
defecate at all. They can also have ribbon-like stools and some swelling in the back legs.
If the tumor increases blood calcium levels, your dog may drink and urinate more, eat
less, vomit, and seem weak and tired.
Other possible signs include:
Swelling at the rear end
Licking the rear end more than usual
Bleeding around the anus
Bloody stool
Dogs with anal sac tumors may also scoot, meaning they sit and drag their rear end
against the ground. However, scooting much more commonly indicates full or inflamed
anal glands that need to be expressed (squeezed) by your veterinarian, rather than
cancer.
How Are Anal Sac Tumors Diagnosed?
Your veterinarian will talk to you about the history of your dog’s problem and perform a
physical exam. As part of this, they may conduct a rectal exam to feel for the tumor.
During this procedure, they will place a gloved finger in your dog’s anus into the rectum.
If they feel or see a growth, they might do a fine needle aspiration of the mass. This
means they will poke the mass with a needle, suck out some of the cells, put them on a
glass slide, and send it to a lab for evaluation. This information will help narrow down what
the mass is. If these results are suspicious of cancer, your veterinarian will likely surgically
remove the mass and send it to a lab to confirm it is cancer.
Your veterinarian will also do additional tests to see if and where the tumor has spread
and if it has affected the body in other ways. For example, your veterinarian may do blood
and urine tests, to check for high blood calcium and kidney damage, as well as chest Xrays and abdominal ultrasound to see if the tumor has spread to the lymph nodes and
organs, such as the lungs, liver, and kidneys.
How Are Anal Sac Tumors Treated?
Until more serious treatment can be pursued, your veterinarian may recommend stool
softeners to make it easier for your dog to defecate and give fluids and medications. They
may also refer you to a veterinary surgeon more well-versed in treating these serious
tumors.
Surgery
If it is possible, surgical removal of the mass and any enlarged lymph nodes in the area is
the main way to treat malignant (cancerous) anal gland adenocarcinomas. Surgery has
been shown to lengthen the survival time of dogs with anal sac adenocarcinomas.
However, tumors may eventually reappear if cancer cells are left behind and the cancer
cells may have already spread to other sites at the time of removal.

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anal Sac Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10370944&ind=164&objTypeID=1007 2/4
With benign (non-cancerous) perianal gland adenomas, surgery usually cures the
disease, but regrowth can occur in some dogs over time.
After surgery, some dogs won’t be able to control their bowel movements for a while and
there is an infection risk at the surgical site, especially if it is near the route feces take out
of the body.
Chemotherapy and Radiation - Malignant Tumors
Because malignant anal sac tumors have such a high risk of spread, chemotherapy is
often recommended after surgery. It involves giving medications, often via the mouth or
blood, to kill or inhibit cancer cells throughout the body.
Radiation therapy may also be recommended after or instead of surgery if surgery isn’t
possible. It involves using radiation to destroy cancer cells. It is only offered at certain
facilities, such as veterinary schools and some specialty practices, due to the expense of
the equipment. Some people travel significant distances to get radiation services.
Both chemotherapy and radiation therapy can have serious side effects that your
veterinarian will discuss with you.
What is the Prognosis (Outlook) for Malignant Anal Sac Tumors?
Survival times for dogs with anal sac tumors are variable but on average range from about
1-2 years. However, every dog’s situation is different because the prognosis depends on
many factors such as:
The size of the tumor
Spread throughout the body
Blood calcium levels
Type of treatment
Dogs who receive surgery or any type of treatment generally have a better prognosis
whereas the outlook is often less promising for dogs with larger tumors, high blood
calcium levels, and extensive spread of the tumor.
How Can I Prevent Anal Sac Tumors?
There’s no proven way to prevent anal sac tumors from developing. Early detection is
important and may be achieved through routine rectal exams performed by your
veterinarian. Sometimes anal sac tumors are an incidental finding during a seemingly
healthy pet’s physical exam. Maintaining a regular exam schedule as recommended by
your veterinarian can help screen for anal sac and other abnormalities, hopefully keeping
your dog as healthy and happy as possible.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10370944&pid=19239
da9c6475-a18c-499a-93af-4da5831fed9a.1754156337
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anal Sac Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10370944&ind=164&objTypeID=1007 3/4

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anal Sac Tumors in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10370944&ind=164&objTypeID=1007 4/4
DO NOT IGNORE GRADUAL APPETITE REDUCTION. DO NOT IGNORE
FOOD REFUSAL.Many people get confused by the human eating
disorder “anorexia nervosa.” When the veterinarian says the pet has
anorexia, it does not mean the pet has a distorted view of his or her
body; it simply means the pet is not eating. Illustration courtesy
MarVistaVet
Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 03, 2024
Published: February 25, 2007
Appetite loss and appetite
reduction are important factors in
illness assessment, and they must
be recognized and reported as
soon as possible. Acceptance of
favorite foods often determines if a
pet should be hospitalized or not. A
couple of off days is generally not a
big problem as long as your pet
maintains hydration one way or
another and recovers promptly, but
recurring episodes of poor appetite
or slow, gradual reduction in
appetite are important and
frequently point to a chronic
progressive illness. Nutritional
support not only helps your pet
recover but also buys time to keep
your pet stable while diagnosis and
treatment are worked out. Your pet
must be fed in order to get well.
The term anorexia simply means eating no food. Many people get confused by the
human eating disorder anorexia nervosa. When the veterinarian says your pet has
anorexia, it does not mean they have a distorted body image; it simply means they
are not eating.
So, how do you get your pet to eat? Some techniques are reviewed here. Be sure to
check with your veterinarian regarding the proper amount of food to feed and which foods
are acceptable. Eating only a few bites of food or drinking the gravy does not constitute a
good appetite, so when asked if your pet is eating, this isn't really a yes or no question. Be
specific about quantity.
Don't wait for the appetite to completely disappear before seeking veterinary
assistance.
Pets with a poor appetite are sick, and if you wait until the appetite is completely gone, it
may be too late for recovery. This is particularly true for cats. As the appetite fades, your
pet must depend on stored fat for nutrients. When large amounts of fats are mobilized to
meet energy demands, they must be processed by the liver before being used for
calories. The feline liver is not designed to handle large amounts of fat and will fail in a
condition called hepatic lipidosis.
First Offer Canned Food

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952607&ind=165&objTypeID=1007 1/5
If you think your pet’s appetite is poor but are
offering only kibbled food, your first step is to
get some canned food and offer that. Most
animals find canned diets far more palatable
than dry foods, and you may find that this
step alone fully alleviates the problem. There
is a misconception that canned food is
somehow of poor nutritional quality. In fact,
canned food and dry food differ primarily in
their water content and, thus in texture. If
you consider the food without water, the
unprepared diet is basically a powdered
meat mix similar to flour. It can be baked into
a kibble or steamed into a canned food.
Canned foods differ in quality just as dry foods do. See if your pet will eat canned food or
a mixture of dry and canned food. Adding a flavored broth or cooked egg is also helpful in
enticing them to eat a kibbled diet.
Second, Offer a Delicacy
Foods that are generally regarded as delicacies among pets include canned chicken,
cooked egg, and canned tuna. Therapeutic recovery formula diets are generally well
accepted.
With the exception of the recovery diets, these treats are not nutritionally complete but can
make a good jump starter for pets. A pet that has not been eating may feel continued
discomfort until eating begins again. Something tasty may be necessary to get the
appetite restarted.
Do not simply put the food in a dish in front of your pet. Instead, rub a small amount on the
teeth or spoon a little in the mouth so that your pet can get a taste. Don't be surprised if he
spits it out; you are just trying to get the taste of the food in his mouth. Hold the bowl up to
your pet's nose so that the aroma is inescapable. You may find that coaxing in this way
gets the appetite started.
A Note on Gourmet Cat Foods (Yes, Dogs Eat Them, too)
Several "extra tasty" products available in the grocery store can be really helpful in
tempting a pet with a poor appetite. Fancy Feast by Purina comes in numerous textures
and flavors, each can containing approximately 100 calories. The diet is complete and
balanced for cats and is often a good appetite jump starter. Temptations®, by Mars
Petcare, are especially well-accepted treats made for cats. Because many cats will not eat
anything else, they have been balanced to be nutritionally complete for cats and can be
used as a cat's sole diet if necessary.
A Note on Starting Prescription Diets
If your pet is supposed to eat a prescription diet but refuses, do not attempt to
starve them into eating the prescription food.
Many prescription diets are relatively bland, and pets do not wish to eat them, particularly
if they are used to eating large amounts of table scraps (always a bad practice) or a more
flavorful regular food. Starving the pet will only make him sicker. Try a gradual change
from the regular food to the new food over a week or so. If your pet simply will not accept
the new food, be sure to let your veterinarian know this. There may be an alternative
flavor to try; further, prescription diets are guaranteed by the manufacturer meaning you
can get a full refund on the bag or case if the pet does not accept the food. Sometimes, it
is necessary to forgo the therapeutic aspect of the special diet just to get your pet to eat,
but your veterinarian will help you with these guidelines.

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952607&ind=165&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Provide Privacy
Be sure other pets at home do not bully or distract the sick pet. In a multi-pet home, it may
be difficult for the sickly or elderly pet to eat without the younger pets taking his food.
Many animals wish to eat at their leisure, particularly if they do not feel well. Consider
giving your pet a private area and their own dish. Never feed multiple pets from the same
bowl, as one is sure to get the lion’s share of the food to the other’s disadvantage.
Many pets like to eat overnight when no one is watching.
Medical Assistance
Appetite-stimulating medications are available.
There are several products available that can create a sense of hunger:
Capromorelin: This is an oral liquid that mimics the body’s natural system and generates a
sense of hunger. It is best given daily rather than only on bad days. Capromorelin is
available in both a canine and a feline formula. 
Mirtazapine: This is a pill originally developed as an anti-depressant for humans but was
found to have appetite increase as a side effect. It is available as a tablet, typically given
daily for dogs or every two to three days for cats, or as a transdermal gel for cats which is
applied daily to the inner surface of the ear.
Cyproheptadine: This is a psychoactive anti-histamine that has an appetite stimulation
side effect. It is available as a pill and is typically used twice daily.
Prednisolone/Prednisone: This hormonal anti-inflammatory has a number of uses in the
treatment of immune mediated conditions, inflammatory conditions, cancer therapy and
many other situations. One of its side effects is increased appetite and it is sometimes
used for this effect, though because it affects so many body systems, it is generally not
used for its appetite effect alone.
These medications represent non-invasive ways to medically improve appetite.
Assisted Feeding
Noninvasive methods are all well and good, but the bottom line is that an animal that does
not eat will get sicker and ultimately die. Receiving nutrients is the basis of recovery, and
one cannot simply wait around for days for medications to work. Nutrients must be
delivered ideally in a way that is not stressful for either the pet or the human caretaker.
Feeding Tubes
Feeding tubes are the least stressful method of delivering nutrition and can be placed
through the nose, throat, directly into the stomach, or into the intestine. Liquid diets are
delivered through the tube, usually with no resistance from the patient whatsoever since
the mouth and face are not manipulated.
Gaining in popularity is the esophagostomy or E tube. This tube is placed in the
esophagus via an incision in the side of the neck. A bandage or special cloth collar may be
used to hold it in place, though many patients do not require a wrap of any kind. The
placement procedure is fairly short, and the tube is comfortable for your pet. Protective
cone collars are not generally needed and the pet can go about his or her life with the
tube in place. The larger size of the tube allows for blenderized diets which can be
prepared at home for less expense than prepared liquid diets. (In parts of Europe,
esophagostomy, or E-tubes, are spelled as oesophageal tubes and therefore referred to
as O-tubes.)

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952607&ind=165&objTypeID=1007 3/5
An E tube. Photo courtesy Dr. Jen Devey
An E tube. Photo courtesy of Mar Vista Vet
An E tube. Photo courtesy Dr. Deb Zoran
Feeding does not require fussing with the pet’s
face and thus is more comfortable. Bandages
must be kept clean around the area, and tubes
must be kept in place for a minimum amount of
time to allow for proper scar tissue to form,
sealing the feeding hole to the outer tissue. When
the time comes, the tube can be pulled, and the
hole seals up. These kinds of tubes require brief
surgical placement, and thus anesthetic risks
apply.
Nasogastric tubes (N-G) that go through the nose
require no anesthesia to place but do require an
Elizabethan collar to prevent the pet from yanking
the tube out. They can accommodate only a liquid
diet because of their small diameter and are
difficult to manage at home. Most animals will not
want a piece of equipment attached to their face
and will try to remove it. N-G tubes are best used
for patients that are too sick to try to pull out the
tube. Alternatively, they can be placed for the
feeding process and then removed.
Feeding tubes can similarly be placed in the
stomach and protrude from a belly bandage.
Tubes running directly into the stomach this way
are called "gastrostomy tubes" or simply "GTubes."
The G-tube has all the advantages of the E-tube
and is favored by some doctors. Again, the tube
diameter is large enough to accommodate a slurry
rather than a liquid, and the tube is comfortable to
wear and use. Placing the tube requires a brief
surgery under general anesthesia.
Syringe or Force-feeding
In the past, syringe or force-feeding was used in
an effort to get calories into a pet. There are
several disadvantages to this technique and no
advantages. First, your pet is not going to like it,
and there will be a struggle, stress, and mess.
The pet may be too sick to withstand stressful
feedings, and creating ongoing unpleasant
feeding experiences can result in what is called
"food aversion," where the pet may not ever have
a normal appetite again. Feeding too quickly can
lead to choking or food aspiration if the feeder is
too aggressive. Talk with your veterinarian before
using this method, as it can be detrimental to your
pet.
Nutritional support is essential to proper recovery and it is important to realize
that there are several techniques available to see that your pet does not suffer
extra debilitation from malnourishment. If you think your pet has a problem with
weight loss or inadequate appetite, do not wait until the problem is extreme; see

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952607&ind=165&objTypeID=1007 4/5
your veterinarian promptly.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952607&pid=19239
3851832a-634e-47c9-a946-e79a4ca16c27.1754156379
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:09 PM Anorexia, or Lack of Appetite, in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952607&ind=165&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Campylobacter organisms grown in culture. Note their characteristic
wavy shape. Image courtesy CDC.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: December 16, 2023
Published: January 31, 2006
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a
small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby. Most of these problems stem from
contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Feeding raw food diets to pets
dramatically increases the exposure to infectious organisms to the humans in the family.
Since these conditions are also human diseases, it is helpful to have some understanding
of what they are, even if there are no young pets or immune-suppressed individuals
(human or otherwise) at home.
Campylobacter
Campylobacter species are a group
of bacteria capable of causing
diarrhea in dogs, cats, humans, and
other animals. They have a unique
curved appearance under the
microscope and are said to be sea
gull-shaped. They are difficult to
isolate as they grow in conditions of
low oxygen (making them
microaerophilic as opposed to being
aerobic or anaerobic bacteria). With
regard to pets, Campylobacter are
generally a problem for the very
young. Puppies and kittens have not
yet matured immunologically. Plus,
because they are small, fluid loss
from diarrhea hits them much
harder. Furthermore, puppies and kittens are more likely to be housed in groups where
fecal cross-contamination is common so they may be more likely to become infected than
adult animals. Adult animals commonly have Campylobacter organisms living in their
intestines, but they do not experience any sickness due to it.
In humans, Campylobacter infection is a leading cause of gastrointestinal (GI) disease;
infected dogs and cats can carry the organism and spread it even if they do not have
symptoms themselves. For this reason, pets used for therapy in assisted living
communities and similar situations should be screened for Campylobacter by fecal culture
before exposure to people with suppressed immunity. Humans are also infected by
consumption of contaminated food, water, or raw milk; only 6% of human Campylobacter
infections are attributed to dog exposure. That said, exposure to a dog with diarrhea
triples a person’s risk for developing enteritis from Campylobacter jejuni or Campylobacter
coli. Studies screening pet animals for inapparent Campylobacter infections have found
surprisingly high incidences of inapparent infection. In one study in the Midwest, 24% of
152 healthy cats were positive, for example.

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952423&ind=166&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Salmonella. Image courtesy CDC
After consuming Campylobacter organisms, they travel to the lower small intestine, attach,
and multiply. They produce a toxin that destroys the lining of the intestine with the result
being a bloody, mucous diarrhea (though occasionally a more watery diarrhea is
described). Sometimes a fever results, appetite becomes poor, and vomiting can occur.
Incubation is 2 to 5 days. The organism can survive as long as a month in environmental
feces.
Diagnosis is made by seeing the sea gull-shaped organisms under the microscope;
however, there are so many bacterial organisms on a fecal sample that finding the culprit
can be tricky. For this reason, a culture is often performed as a more accurate test.
Because the organism is microaerophilic, specific culture requirements must be met; the
facilities of a reference laboratory are needed.
Treatment is with appropriate antibiotics, such as erythromycin, chloramphenicol or tylosin.
Salmonella
Most people are somewhat familiar with
Salmonella. They know it represents a type of food
poisoning, probably know it is associated with
diarrhea that can be severe, and may even know that
Salmonella species are bacteria. Most human cases
of Salmonella infection cause fever, diarrhea, and
cramping that go away on their own, but in children, it
can produce more severe disease. As with
Campylobacter, the young are more susceptible to
more severe illness because they are smaller and do
not have mature immunity. The same is true with
puppies and kittens; adult animals are almost never
affected by Salmonella infection.
An important exception to the "Salmonella is rare in adult dogs" rule is the case of dogs
fed a raw food diet. It has become popular to feed raw foods to pets with the idea that a
raw food diet more closely approximates the natural diet that the feline or canine body
evolved to consume, and thus, such a diet should be healthier than commercially
prepared foods. In fact, cooking food is central to removing parasites, bacteria, and
bacterial toxins from food. A recent study evaluating raw food diets found that 80% of food
samples contained Salmonella bacteria and that 30% of the dogs in the study were
shedding Salmonella bacteria in their stool. Adult dogs are often asymptomatic, but any
infected animal or person will shed the organism for at least six weeks, thus acting as a
source of exposure to other animals or people. Salmonella organisms are difficult to
remove from the environment and easily survive three months in soil. Again, dogs used for
therapy around the elderly or children should be cultured for Salmonella.
There are two syndromes associated with Salmonella: diarrhea and sepsis. Salmonella
bacteria, once consumed, attach to the intestine and secrete toxins. The toxins produce
diarrhea that can be severe and even life-threatening in the young. If this were not bad
enough, some Salmonella can produce an even more serious “part two" (sepsis) should
these bacteria invade the body through the damaged intestine, causing a more
widespread and much more serious infection.
In young animals, the syndrome resulting is similar to that of canine parvovirus thus
similar treatment is expected.
E. Coli
Escherichia coli may be the most common
bacterial organism in the world. It lives in our
intestines naturally and covers the world we
live in. Unfortunately, some strains of E. coli

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952423&ind=166&objTypeID=1007 2/4
are not so neighborly and are capable of
producing diarrhea via toxin production. Like
the other organisms we have discussed, this
is a serious problem for the very young and
more of a nuisance for adults. There are
three main types of unfriendly E. coli:
Enterotoxic E. coli, enterohemorrhagic E.
coli, and enteropathogenic E. coli.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli is a common cause of
diarrhea in young animals as well as human
infants and is responsible for the famous
traveler’s diarrhea. These bacteria produce
what is called an enterotoxin in the upper
small intestine. This toxin, similar to the toxin
of cholera, causes the intestine cells to
secrete the body's fluid into the intestine, creating spectacular watery diarrhea and what
can be life-threatening dehydration for smaller living creatures. Young pigs, cattle, and
other livestock are commonly lost to this kind of dehydration. Again, the younger and
smaller the patient is, the more serious this infection is.
Enteropathogenic E. coli also produce diarrhea in humans and animals. Rather than a
secretory diarrhea as above, they simply destroy the intestinal cells where they attach.
Diarrhea still results, but it creates more damage to the intestinal lining.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli is similar to enteropathogenic E. coli but with more associated
inflammation. This type does not seem to be a problem for small animals though they can
carry it asymptomatically.
It would seem that antibiotics would be the obvious treatment for a bacterial disease, yet
for E. coli it is surprisingly controversial. It seems that the use of antibiotics can enhance
the synthesis of toxins by these bacteria; plus, oftentimes, antibiotic use only serves to
make E. coli more resistant in the GI tract. Antibiotics are generally reserved for those
animals (or people) who seem the most sick or who have evidence of bacterial invasion in
the bloodstream. Basically, treatment is supportive care until the patient's immune system
regains the upper hand.
In Conclusion
Bacterial diarrheas are an especially serious consideration in the very young and in the
weak or compromised, be they human or non-human. It is not unusual for apparently
healthy animals to carry these organisms and shed them into the environment and feeding
raw foods greatly increases the risk of this kind of latent infection. If you are considering
raw food diets, especially if someone in the home is very young or has a compromised
immunity, discuss prevention of these infections with your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952423&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156705
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952423&ind=166&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952423&ind=166&objTypeID=1007 4/4
A veterinarian performs an ultrasound on a dog. Image courtesy
MarVistaVet
Biliary Mucocele is a Surgical Emergency in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 03, 2024
Published: August 27, 2012
It all starts with a sick, usually middle-aged or older dog. He is listless, not eating, and
maybe has vomiting and/or diarrhea and fever. These are symptoms that could mean any
number of things, but usually, when he reaches the veterinarian’s examination table, he
has jaundice (yellow pigmentation visible in the whites of his eyes and possibly on his skin
and gums). Hospitalization is recommended to rehydrate him and provide supportive care.
Blood tests point to a liver problem. Medications are given to minimize the liver’s
workload, but soon, an ultrasound is being discussed to image the liver, and costs may
rise quickly.
In a survey of dogs with hepatobiliary mucoceles, the following symptoms were observed:
The alphabet soup of blood tests can be confusing, and it can be
tempting to wait a few days and see how medical support works
out before imaging. While this may be a fair choice depending on
the patient, there is an important reason to image the liver quickly:
the possibility that surgery is needed urgently.
If Liver Disease is the Problem, Why is an Ultrasound Needed?
While blood testing can point to the liver, the fact is that numerous
diseases can affect the liver. The liver can have an infection,
cancer, scarring (cirrhosis), or any number of conditions. The
more specific our diagnosis gets, the more specific treatment can
be.
Ultrasound is a non-invasive way
to evaluate the internal texture of
the liver and gallbladder. By
looking at the liver’s texture, it is
possible to see a tumor and
determine if removing it is possible
or if it has invaded too far.
Ultrasound can evaluate scarring
and abscesses. Through
ultrasound, it is possible to guide a
biopsy needle to an exact area to
sample tissue should this be
deemed necessary. Ultrasound
evaluates the gallbladder and bile
ducts. One of the more important
diseases to rule out promptly is
the biliary mucocele because it is commonly a surgical emergency. A biliary mucocele is a
wad of sludged mucus inside the gallbladder. If you wait a few days to see how the patient
responds to general liver support, it may be too late for surgery. Furthermore, ultrasound

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Biliary Mucocele is a Surgical Emergency in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5511092&ind=167&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
can evaluate the gallbladder’s integrity; if the mucocele ruptures and spills bile into the
belly, the surgeon will need to know that as additional treatment is needed. Ultrasound
also evaluates concurrent abdominal conditions that might impact recovery, including
pancreatitis, which can occur alone with similar symptoms or in addition to a biliary
mucocele.
If the patient has a surgical disease, they will not get better until surgery is
performed in the vast majority of cases. Furthermore, it may be a
surgical emergency (not only will surgery be needed but it will be needed
immediately). The sooner the need for surgery is identified, the better the
chance of survival.
What Is the Gallbladder, and What Is the Biliary System?
The liver serves as a toxic waste processing
center for the body. It filters bacterial
products (as well as nutrients) entering the
body from the gastrointestinal tract and it
removes toxic waste products from the
bloodstream. This material is bound to
special biochemicals called bile acids and
the body would like to get rid of it, bile acids
and all. The solution of bile acids, water,
mucus, pigments, and cholesterol forms the
greenish-yellow fluid called bile.
Bile is made in the liver and then collected
into small ducts called bile ductules and bile
ducts. The bile is then moved for storage
into the greenish round organ called the
gallbladder. During food digestion,
hormones cause the gallbladder to contract
and squirt bile through the large common
bile duct and into the intestine. The bile
assists with digestion and carries toxins out of the body so they may be eliminated in
feces. The gallbladder and its ducts represent the biliary system.
If the biliary tract obstructs, the patient becomes rapidly jaundiced, painful, and
sick.
What Is a Biliary Mucocele?
One of the components of bile is mucus. Normal bile is probably less than 3% mucus, but
when a mucocele develops, the bile becomes mostly mucus. Normal bile is liquid, but
mucocele bile is thick and goopy and will not flow easily through the common bile duct.
The gallbladder distends trying to pass the mucocele bile, and if it actually ruptures, the
risk of serious complications and death is much higher. The gallbladder with a mucocele
develops an appearance on ultrasound described as resembling the cut surface of kiwi
fruit. The biliary mucocele is sometimes called a "kiwi gallbladder."
When this is seen on ultrasound in a sick, jaundiced patient, surgery to remove the
diseased gallbladder should be performed as soon as possible.
Why Does This Happen?

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Biliary Mucocele is a Surgical Emergency in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5511092&ind=167&objTypeID=1007 2/4
The diseased gall bladder appears similar in texture pattern to the cut surface of a
kiwi fruit. Photo courtesy of DVMSound.
The biliary mucocele is sometimes called a
"kiwi gallbladder." Image courtesy MarVistaVet
Mucocele development
starts with delayed
gallbladder contraction,
which allows bile acids to
accumulate. Altered fat
metabolism is also
associated with reduced
gallbladder contraction,
resulting in an
accumulation of bile
acid. With that
accumulation, the lining
of the gallbladder feels
inflamed and responds
by making more mucus
and more mucusproducing glands. Pretty
soon, the bile is just a
big wad of congealed
mucus, and it will not
flow.
Several hormone imbalances have been associated
with altered fat metabolism and reduced gallbladder
contraction: diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and
Cushing's disease. Cushing's disease patients have
an incidence of biliary mucocele development that is
29 times the incidence of patients without Cushing's
disease. Mucocele development has been linked
to pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas) as
well.
Having Cushing’s Syndrome increases a dog’s
risk of developing a biliary mucocele by 29
times more than the general population.
No one knows why this might be so, but it does correspond to the mainstreaming of
diagnostic ultrasound into general practice.
The Shetland sheepdog, cocker spaniel, miniature schnauzer, and dachshund seem
predisposed to developing biliary mucoceles.
Removing the Gallbladder (Cholecystectomy)
Removing a dog’s gallbladder is a serious surgery that not all veterinarians are
comfortable performing. Discuss with your veterinarian whether a referral to a specialist
would be best for you and your pet.
The goal is to remove the gallbladder before it ruptures. If it has already ruptured, tissue
damaged by the rupture must be cleansed or removed. Whether or not the gallbladder
that has a mucocele is removed before or after rupture does not affect the rate of survival.
Mucocele surgery survival rate is 75-80%. However, if the gallbladder ruptures
before surgery occurs, the survival rate decreases significantly to 25-40%,
depending on the study.

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Biliary Mucocele is a Surgical Emergency in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5511092&ind=167&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The gall bladder’s function is mainly one of bile storage. Without the gallbladder, bile
simply dribbles into the intestine constantly rather than in controlled squirts. You might
think this would be a problem, but it turns out not to be. Some patients require long-term
medication for liver support but generally speaking, if the dog recovers from surgery, the
prognosis is excellent, and the patient can return to normal life.
What if Surgery is Not an Option, or What if the Dog Isn't that Sick?
There is no question that surgery is the best treatment choice, but there is more to the
story. Biliary mucoceles can be an incidental finding in dogs who are not sick or who are
sick from something else and are having an ultrasound of the belly for some other reason.
In a patient who is not experiencing problems with a mucocele, medication may be able to
stave off illness in some cases.
As for skipping surgery on a dog that is sick from its mucocele, this is a very risky move.
It is possible to attempt treatment with general liver support medications, a low-fat diet,
and choleretics (medications to help liquefy bile, such as ursodiol), but the problem is that
the gallbladder is obstructed with a big wad of goop. This goop is unlikely to liquefy in a
timely fashion, if at all, no matter what treatment is given. If medical management is
attempted, it is important to regularly recheck the gallbladder by ultrasound to watch for
any sign of progression that would indicate that surgery should no longer be postponed.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5511092&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156729
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:15 PM Biliary Mucocele is a Surgical Emergency in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5511092&ind=167&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Published: September 24, 2024
Vomiting is a very common complaint in both the
veterinary ER and in general practice. In some
cases, it represents simple gastroenteritis (irritation
of the stomach and/or intestines) and can be
resolved with uncomplicated interventions like a
bland diet and resting the gastrointestinal tract.
Simple gastroenteritis can happen for many
reasons, including a change in diet, stress, or
certain infections. In many cases, the cause is not
found, but the patient will respond to treatment
within a few days.
Vomiting represents a spectrum of other, more serious, diseases, from organ failure and
intestinal foreign bodies (blockages) to pancreatitis and cancer, so it is important not to
dismiss it as “just hairballs” or something related to aging.
Some signs that vomiting may be more serious and warrant a visit to the veterinarian
include:
Pain
Recent ingestion of human food, garbage, toys, or clothing
Lethargy, or inability to get up
A distended abdomen
Refusal to eat
Weight loss
Recent changes in water intake or urination
Non-productive vomiting (nothing or just some white foam comes up)
Potential Causes
There is one common cause of vomiting that may respond to some very simple
interventions at home. This is bilious vomiting – which, by definition, happens on an empty
stomach. Bilious simply means your pet vomited because they are nauseous.
In bilious vomiting, pets frequently vomit foamy or watery yellow fluid in the early hours of
the morning or after not eating for several hours. It is usually seen when pets are only fed
once daily or fed early in the afternoon. After digesting a meal, the stomach may start to
prepare for the next meal by producing stomach acid and bile. (Bile is a yellowish
substance produced by the liver which aids in the digestion of fats.)
Both substances can be irritating to an empty stomach, resulting in vomiting. There may
also be some motility issues involving the delayed passage of food through the intestines,
but in many cases, the stomach and intestines are normal, and it is merely a timing issue.
Think of it as the stomach being “hangry.”

8/2/25, 11:16 PM Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=12296225&ind=168&objTypeID=1007 1/2
As opposed to one of the more common ways of dealing with an irritated stomach
(avoiding food or water for several hours to allow the stomach to rest and heal), the
treatment for bilious vomiting involves feeding – and perhaps an adjustment to the normal
feeding schedule.
If your pet is normally active and has a good appetite but vomits watery or foamy yellow
fluid several hours after feeding, consider talking to your family veterinarian about the
possibility of bilious vomiting syndrome as a cause. But keep in mind that the problem
may be more complicated than it first appears.
Treatment
Treatment usually involves decreasing the
time between feedings or offering a latenight or early-morning meal to decrease the
amount of time that the stomach is empty.
Either prescribed or over-the-counter
medications may also be recommended. It is
important not to increase the amount of food
fed in a day – only to space out feedings and
follow any other medication or dietary
recommendations from your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=12296225&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156755
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:16 PM Bilious Vomiting Syndrome in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=12296225&ind=168&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 11, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Many injuries and physical disorders represent life-threatening emergencies, but there is
only one condition so drastic that it overshadows them all in terms of rapidity of
consequences and effort in emergency treatment: the gastric dilatation and volvulus – the
bloat.
What is it, and Why Is It So Serious?
The normal stomach sits high in the abdomen and contains a small amount of gas, some
mucus, and any food being digested. It undergoes a normal rhythm of contraction,
receiving food from the esophagus above, grinding the food, and moving the ground food
out to the small intestine at its other end. Normally, this proceeds uneventfully except for
the occasional burp.
In the bloated stomach, gas and/or food stretches the stomach many times its normal
size, causing tremendous abdominal pain. For reasons we do not fully understand, this
grossly distended stomach tends to rotate, thus twisting off not only its own blood supply
but the only exit routes for the gas inside. The spleen, which normally nestles along the
greater curvature of the stomach, can twist as well, cutting off its circulation. The
distended stomach becomes so large that it compresses the large veins that run along the
back, returning the body's blood to the heart, creating a circulatory shock. Not only is this
collection of disasters extremely painful, but it is also rapidly life-threatening. A dog with a
bloated, twisted stomach (more scientifically called gastric dilatation and volvulus) will die
in pain in a matter of hours unless drastic steps are taken.
What Are the Risk Factors for Developing Bloat?
Dogs weighing more than 99 pounds have an approximate 20 percent risk of
bloat. The risk of bloating increases with age.
Classically, this condition affects dog breeds that are said to be deep-chested, meaning
the length of their chest from backbone to sternum is relatively long while the chest width
from right to left is narrow. Examples of deep-chested breeds would be the Great Dane,
Greyhound, and the setter breeds. Still, any dog can bloat, even dachshunds and
chihuahuas.
Classically, the bloated dog has recently eaten a large meal and exercised heavily shortly
thereafter. Still, we usually do not know why a given dog bloats on an individual basis. No
specific diet or dietary ingredient has been proven to be associated with bloat. Some
factors found to increase and decrease the risk of bloat are listed below:
Summary of Factors Increasing the Risk of Bloat
Increasing age
Having closely related family members with a history of bloat
Eating rapidly

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Feeding from an elevated bowl
Feeding a dry food with fat or oil listed
in the first four ingredients.
Factors that May Decrease the Risk of Bloat
Adding table scraps, canned food, or
non-kibble supplements to the dog's
kibble diet reduced the risk of bloat in
some studies. More research is needed
to fully understand the implications of
this.
Happy or easy-going temperament
Feeding a dry food containing a
calcium-rich meat meal (such as
meat/lamb meal, fish meal, chicken byproduct meal, meat meal, or bone
meal) listed in the first four ingredients
of the ingredient list.
Eating two or more meals per day
Contrary to popular belief, cereal ingredients
such as soy, wheat, or corn in the first four
ingredients of the ingredient list do not increase
the risk of bloat.
In a study done by the Purdue University
Research Group, headed by Dr. Lawrence T.
Glickman:
The Great Dane was the #1 breed at
risk for bloat. (The incidence of bloat in
this breed is reported to be 42%.
Preventive gastropexy should be
considered as described below.)
The St. Bernard was the #2 breed at
risk for bloat.
The Weimaraner was the #3 breed at
risk for bloat.
In the 1993 study from Germany (see below),
the German shepherd dog and the boxer had
the highest risk for bloat.
How to Tell if Your Dog Has Bloated
Classically, the dog is distressed and makes
multiple attempts to vomit, and the upper
abdomen is hard and distended from the gas
within, though in a well-muscled or overweight
dog, the distention may not be obvious. There
are other potential emergencies (sudden
abdominal bleeding from a ruptured tumor, for
example) that might have a similar
presentation, so radiographs may be needed
to determine what has happened. The

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 2/6
hallmark presentation of bloat is a sudden
onset of abdominal distention, distress,
anxiety, and pain (panting, guarding the belly,
anguished facial expression), and multiple
attempts at vomiting that are frequently
unproductive. Not every dog will have a
classic appearance, and some dogs will not
have obvious abdominal distention because
of their body configuration. If you are not sure,
it is best to err on the side of caution and rush
your dog to the veterinarian immediately.
What Has To Be Done
There are several steps to saving a bloated
dog’s life. Part of the problem is that all steps
should be done at the same time and as
quickly as possible.
First: The Stomach Must be Decompressed
The huge stomach is by now pressing on the
major blood vessels, carrying blood back to
the heart. This stops normal circulation and
sends the dog into shock. Making matters
worse, the stomach tissue is dying because it
is stretched too tightly to allow blood
circulation through it. There can be no
recovery until the stomach is untwisted and
the gas is released. A stomach tube and
stomach pump are generally used for this, but
sometime surgery is needed to achieve
stomach decompression.
Also First: Rapid IV Fluids Must be Given to
Reverse the Shock
Intravenous catheters are placed, and lifegiving fluid solutions are rushed in to replace
the blood that cannot get past the bloated
stomach to return to the heart. The intense
pain associated with this disease causes the
heart rate to race at such a high rate that
heart failure will result. Medication to resolve
the pain is needed if the patient’s heart rate is
to slow down. Medication for shock,
antibiotics, and electrolytes are all vital in
stabilizing the patient.
Also First: The Heart Rhythm is Assessed and
Stabilized
A special and very dangerous rhythm problem
called a premature ventricular contraction, or
"PVC," is associated with bloat and it must be
ruled out. If this is the case, intravenous
medications are needed to stabilize the
rhythm. Since this rhythm problem may not be
evident until even the next day, continual EKG

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 3/6
monitoring may be necessary. If the disturbed heart rhythm is noted at the very beginning
of treatment, this is associated with a 38% mortality rate.
Getting the bloated dog's stomach decompressed and reversing the shock is an
adventure in itself, but the work is not yet half finished.
Surgery
All bloated dogs, once stable, should have surgery. Without surgery, the damage done
inside cannot be assessed or repaired, plus bloat may recur at any point, even within the
next few hours, and the above adventure must be repeated. If the stomach has not
untwisted with decompression, the surgeon untwists it and determines what tissue is
viable and what is not. If there is a section of dying tissue on the stomach wall, this must
be discovered and removed, or the dog will die despite the heroics described above. Also,
the spleen, which is located adjacent to the stomach, may twist with the stomach,
necessitating removal of the spleen or part of the spleen as well. After the nonviable tissue
is removed, a surgery called a gastropexy is done to tack the stomach into its normal
position to prevent future twisting.
If the tissue damage is so bad that part of the stomach must be removed, the mortality
rate jumps to 28 - 38 percent.
If the tissue damage is so bad that the spleen must be removed, the mortality rate is 32 -
38 percent.
After the expense and effort of the stomach decompression, it is tempting to forgo the
further expense of surgery. However, consider that the next time your dog bloats, you may
not be there to catch it in time and, according the study described below, without surgery,
there is a 24 percent mortality rate and a 76 percent chance of re-bloating at some point.
The best choice is to finish the treatment that has been started and have the abdomen
explored. If the stomach can be surgically tacked into place, the recurrence rate drops to 6
percent.
Surgery will prevent the stomach from twisting in the future, but the stomach is still able to
periodically distend with gas. This is uncomfortable but not life-threatening.
Results of a Statistical Study
In 1993, a study involving 134 dogs with gastric dilatation and volvulus was conducted by
the School of Veterinary Medicine in Hanover, Germany.
Out of 134 dogs that came into the hospital with this condition:
10% died or were euthanized prior to surgery (factors involved included
expense of treatment, severity/advancement of disease, etc.)
33 dogs were treated with decompression and no surgery. Of these dogs, eight
(24%) died or were euthanized within the next 48 hours due to poor response
to treatment. (Six of these eight had actually re-bloated.)
Of the dogs that did not have surgical treatment but did survive to go home,
76% had another episode of gastric dilatation and volvulus eventually.
88 dogs were treated with both decompression and surgery. Of these dogs,
10% (nine dogs) died in surgery, 18% (16 dogs) died in the week after surgery,
and 71.5% (63 dogs) went home in good condition. Of the dogs that went home
in good condition, 6% (four dogs) had a second episode of bloat later in life.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 4/6
In this study, 66.4% of the bloated dogs were male, and 33.6% were female.
Most dogs were between ages seven and 12 years old. The German Shepherd
dog and the Boxer appeared to have a greater risk for bloating than did other
breeds.
(Meyer-Lindenberg A., Harder A., Fehr M., Luerssen D., Brunnberg L. Treatment of gastric
dilatation-volvulus and a rapid method for prevention of relapse in dogs: 134 cases (1988-
1991) Journal of the AVMA, Vol 23, No 9, Nov 1, 1993, 1301-1307.)
Another study published in December of 2006 looked at 166 dogs that received surgery
for gastric dilatation and volvulus. The point of the study was to identify factors that led to
poor prognosis.
A 16.2% mortality rate was observed. The mortality rate for dogs over the age
10 years was 21%.
Of the 166 going to surgery, 4.8% were euthanized during surgery, and the
other 11.4% died during hospitalization (two dogs died during surgery). All dogs
that survived to go home were still alive at the time of suture removal.
34 out of 166 dogs had gastric necrosis (dead stomach tissue that had to be
removed). Of these dogs, 26% died or were euthanized.
Post-operative complications of some sort occurred in 75.9% of patients.
Approximately 50% of these dogs developed a cardiac arrhythmia.
Risk factors significantly associated with death prior to suture removal included
clinical signs of bloating for greater than six hours before seeing the vet, partial
stomach removal combined with spleen removal, need for blood transfusion,
low blood pressure at any time during hospitalization, sepsis (blood infection,
and peritonitis (infection of the abdominal membranes).
(Beck, J.J., Staatz, A.J., Pelsue, D.H., Kudnig, S.T., MacPhail, C.M., Seim H.B, and
Monnet, E. Risk factors associated with short-term outcome and development of
perioperative complications in dogs undergoing surgery because of gastric dilatationvolvulus: 166 cases (1992-2003). Journal of the AVMA, Vol 229, No 12, December 15,
2006, p 1934-1939.)
It is crucially important that the owners of big dogs be aware of this condition and
prepared for it. Know where to take your dog during overnight or Sunday hours for
emergency care. Avoid exercising your dog after a large meal. Know what to watch for.
Enjoy the special friendship a large dog provides, but at the same time, be aware of the
large dog's special needs and concerns.
Prevention: Gastropexy Surgery
Preventive gastropexy is an elective surgery usually done at the time of spaying or neuter
in a breed considered at risk. The gastropexy, as mentioned, tacks the stomach to the
body wall, which drastically reduces the stomach's ability to twist. The stomach may
distend with gas in an attempt to bloat, but since twisting is not possible, this becomes a
painful and uncomfortable situation but nothing more serious than that. That said,
gastropexy is not an absolute guarantee against twisting but we are talking about a
recurrence rate of 76% without gastropexy versus 6% recurrence with gastropexy. A
study by Ward, Patonek, and Glickman reviewed the benefit of prophylactic surgery for
bloat. The lifetime risk of death from bloat was calculated, along with estimated treatment

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 5/6
for bloat versus the cost of prophylactic
gastropexy. Prophylactic gastropexy was
found to make sense for at-risk breeds,
especially the Great Dane, which is at the
highest risk for bloat.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951541&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156822
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat - The Mother of All Emergencies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951541&ind=170&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Bloat: First Aid
Roger Gfeller, DVM, DACVECC; Michael Thomas, DVM; Isaac Mayo' The VIN Emergency Medicine
Consultants
Revised: August 13, 2023
Published: December 31, 1994
Bloat is a life-threatening condition in which the stomach fills with air (dilatation) and/or
twists upon itself (volvulus). It’s also called GDV - gastric dilatation volvulus.
What to Do
Transport to a veterinary hospital or emergency facility immediately. In all
cases, this condition requires professional assistance. Most cases will require
surgery.
What NOT to Do
Do not attempt to relieve the gas from the stomach.
Do not give anything by mouth.
It is imperative that this condition be recognized early. Your pet's abdomen may not have a
bloated appearance. Signs of bloat include:
Drooling of saliva
Frequent retching and attempts to vomit (occasionally patients may be able to
regurgitate a pool of foamy saliva)
Anxiety, restlessness, and pacing
Lethargy or agitation
Depression and shock.
Much has been learned about bloat in the past decade. Decades ago, a diagnosis of bloat
was almost always a death sentence because only 25 percent survived. Today the
survival rate is better than 80 percent with surgery. Part of the reason for this is increased
owner awareness. The earlier the veterinarian gets started with treatment and takes the
pet to surgery (after stabilization for shock) the better chance there is for survival.
Extremely aggressive medical and surgical intervention early in the course of the disease
has the most dramatic impact on overall treatment success.
Prevention
Research into this area is ongoing and many studies have produced conflicting results. No
one intervention has been shown to prevent GDV. Elevated feeding may actually increase
the risk of GDV in some patients. Smaller kibble size, feeding smaller more frequent
meals, and not breeding animals with a history of GDV in their lineage may potentially
decrease the risk of GDV for the animal and future generations.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951346&ind=171&objTypeID=1007 1/3
In breeds with a high risk of bloat, such as Great Danes, German Shepherd Dogs, and
Akitas (as well as other deep chested dogs), a preventive surgery called a prophylactic
gastropexy can often be performed when the dog is being spayed or neutered. This
involves surgically attaching the stomach to the inside of the abdomen to prevent rotation
and can sometimes be done through ‘minimally invasive surgery’ or laparoscopy. Ask your
veterinarian for details and advice if you would like to discuss preventive surgery for bloat.
Browse the complete Veterinary Partner First Aid collection.
Introduction: First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
Bandaging: First Aid
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Bleeding: First Aid
Bloat: First Aid
Burns: First Aid
Can't Breathe: First Aid
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Choking: First Aid
Dehydration: First Aid
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Difficult Birth: First Aid
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Electrocution: First Aid
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fever: First Aid
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
Hypothermia: First Aid
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Nosebleed: First Aid
Paralysis: First Aid
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Shock: First Aid
Snakebite: First Aid
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Sunburn: First Aid
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
Wounds: First Aid
Wrapping Up First Aid
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951346&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156847

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951346&ind=171&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Bloat: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951346&ind=171&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Clostridium perfringens spores under the microscope.
Photo by Don Stalons of CDC.
Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 24, 2023
Published: February 13, 2006
When pets get chronic diarrhea, one of the
tests that sooner or later comes up is for
Clostridium perfringens. This bacterium
produces an unpleasant toxin. The situation
sounds simple: a pet gets infected with
toxin-forming bacteria, gets diarrhea, and
the diarrhea should at least improve when
toxin-forming bacteria are removed. As with
most things, the situation turns out to be
more complicated.
What is Clostridium perfringens?
Clostridial diseases are classic in medicine,
both veterinary and human. It is a
Clostridium that causes tetanus
and botulism, and clostridia are responsible
for gangrene, “black leg,” lamb dysentery,
and other famous maladies. Clostridia have several features in common that make them
especially nefarious but most importantly:
They produce toxins.
They are anaerobic (they grow in the absence of oxygen).
They form spores (essentially armor) so as to withstand environmental change,
including disinfectants that would kill more vulnerable bacteria.
Clostridium perfringens is one of the brothers of the evil Clostridium family but is further
classified into five biotypes (A, B, C, D and E) depending on what combination of four
toxins it produces. Dogs are almost exclusively infected with biotype A.
The toxins of significance that it can produce are called enterotoxins. We are particularly
concerned about the alpha, epsilon, and net E/F toxins. These toxins can be seen in
normal dogs, but if they are in high enough amounts, they are associated with diarrhea.
How Would Clostridium perfringens Infection Happen?
In order to produce toxin(s), the organism must form a spore (sporulate). Before it can do
that, it must make its way into the host's intestine from the outside world. The organism
enters the body orally: in food, grooming of fur, chewing up rotten dead things, etc.
When the organism arrives in the small intestine, it forms a spore and begins to produce
its toxin(s). Alternatively, the organism may have been happily and innocuously living in
the intestine for who knows how long when something causes it to sporulate and produce
toxin.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952429&ind=172&objTypeID=1007 1/3
The trigger may be dietary, may be related to infection with another organism, or may
even be related to medications, especially antibiotics. The type of diarrhea produced is
generally a colitis, meaning the large intestine is affected. Such types of diarrhea are
mucousy, possibly bloody, and associated with straining. More watery diarrhea, as comes
from the small intestine, is also possible. The severity of the diarrhea can range from mild
to life-threatening, depending on how much toxin is produced. The important concept is
that C. perfringens toxin can be the cause of chronic diarrhea, or it can be a complicating
factor in diarrhea caused by something else.
Can we Test for Toxin-Producing Strains Of Clostridium perfringens?
The culture will not tell us if the strain present can produce the enterotoxin. Clearly, we
need to know more than whether there are any C. perfringens. How
about culturing for Clostridium perfringens? Again, cultures are not
very helpful. Clostridium perfringens can be cultured from the feces of 80% of dogs,
whether they have diarrhea or not. Some dogs seem to be unaffected.
This is where PCR testing comes in; it is a form of DNA testing whereby the C. perfringens
are tested for the DNA needed to make the different enterotoxins. In this way, we can
detect the genes that are capable of producing enterotoxin. Furthermore, the number of
gene copies can be measured so that we can tell if there are large or small amounts of
toxin genes. Large amounts of toxin genes are associated with disease, so in this way, we
can tell if one of the Clostridium perfringens enterotoxins is likely to be contributing to the
patient's diarrhea.
There is also a test for the toxin, but it is an ELISA format, which means it is either
negative or positive and does not say how much or how little toxin is present. In a perfect
world, this test is combined with the test for the toxin-producing genes so as to confirm
that not only are there large amounts of toxin genes, but they are confirmed to be
producing toxin.
The severity of the diarrhea can be mild all the way to life-threatening.
When Should We Treat for Clostridium perfringens?
Let's begin with the obvious: a pet does not need to be treated for C. perfringens unless
he has diarrhea. Since 80% of dogs harbor Clostridium perfringens whether they have
diarrhea or not, culturing Clostridium perfringens from a fecal sample will not be adequate
for diagnosis; we have to find the toxin or, at the very least, verify the presence of
significant amounts of Clostridial genes capable of producing toxin. And all this must be
found in a patient that actually has diarrhea.
The chances are that a fecal check for worms has been done, and a trial course of an
anti-diarrheal medication has been tried. A possible next step would be a PCR panel that
detects the DNA from an assortment of viruses and bacteria associated with diarrhea.
Often this type of panel includes a test for Clostridial enterotoxin DNA. The laboratory will
report a quantification of gene copies for CPA (the gene for the alpha toxin), CPE (the
gene for the epsilon toxin), and CP net E/F (the gene for the net E/F toxin). If the number
of toxin genes for any of these toxins is significant, treating with antibiotics against
Clostridium is indicated.
Keep in mind that Clostridial diarrhea might be the entire problem and curative with the
right antibiotic or it might be secondary to a bigger problem yet to be discovered.
Treatment for significant Clostridial diarrhea thus might yield only partial results.
Treating the Toxin-Positive Dog with Diarrhea
Any number of antibiotics can be used to remove it. Some choices include ampicillin,
amoxicillin, metronidazole, erythromycin, and tylosin. Tetracycline was formerly on the list,
but it has developed too much resistance. If C. perfringens is responsible for the diarrhea,

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952429&ind=172&objTypeID=1007 2/3
a response to antibiotics is generally seen in a couple of days, but the full course of
medication your veterinarian prescribed should still be completed.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952429&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156869
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:17 PM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952429&ind=172&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 16, 2021
Published: January 01, 2001
What on Earth are Coccidia?
Coccidia are single-celled organisms that infect the intestine. They are microscopic
parasites detectable on routine fecal tests in the same way that worms are, but coccidia
are not worms and are not susceptible to deworming medications. They are also not
visible to the naked eye. Coccidia infection causes watery diarrhea that is sometimes
bloody and can be a life-threatening problem to an especially young or small pet. There
are many different species of coccidia but for dogs and cats, the most common infections
are with coccidia of the genus Cystoisospora. Dogs and cats each have their own coccidia
species and cannot infect each other, nor can they infect people.
Where do Coccidia Come from?
Oocysts (pronounced o'o-sists) are passed in the stool. In the outside world, the oocysts
begin to mature or sporulate, which leaves them able to infect a new host. It only takes
12-36 hours for an oocyst to become infective and after that, any host that accidentally
swallows the oocyst will probably be infected. Because the oocyst becomes infective in
such a short time, it is important to remove stool as quickly as possible so that the pet's
environment does not become contaminated with infective oocysts.
Coccidia infection is especially common in young animals housed in groups (in shelters,
rescue areas, kennels, etc.) This is a common parasite and is not necessarily a sign of
poor husbandry.
Oocysts can also be swallowed by mice, flies, cockroaches or other insects. A dog or cat
can be infected by eating an animal carrying an oocyst.
What Happens after the Host Consumes the Oocyst?
This gets a little complicated, but the short version is that the oocyst breaks open and
releases eight sporozoites. These eight sporozoites go on to infect intestinal cells and,
once inside these cells, they divide rapidly over and over until a new stage called a
merozoite results. The merozoites divide and reproduce rapidly, filling up the intestinal cell
until it bursts. A multitude of merozoites are released when the cell bursts and they go on
to infect and similarly destroy more and more intestinal cells. When enough intestinal cells
are destroyed, in three to 11 days, bloody watery diarrhea and disease result.
Merozoites divide and reproduce asexually but eventually a sexual generation of coccidia
results in microgamonts, which are male, and macrogamonts which are female. They
merge and create an oocyst, which is what started the whole thing in the first place. The
oocyst passes in stool where it can infect a new host and the life cycle begins again.
How are Coccidia Detected?
A routine fecal test is a good idea for any new puppy or kitten whether there are signs of
diarrhea or not as youngsters are commonly parasitized. This sort of test is also a good
idea for any patient with diarrhea and is recommended at least once a year for healthy

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951548&ind=173&objTypeID=1007 1/3
dogs and cats as a screening test. Coccidia are microscopic and a test such as this is
necessary for diagnosis. Small numbers of coccidia can be hard to detect, so just because
a fecal sample tests negative, this doesn’t mean the pet isn’t infected. Sometimes several
fecal tests are performed, especially in a young pet with refractory diarrhea (one that won’t
go away); parasites may not be evident until later in the course of the condition.
How is Coccidia Treated?
There are two common treatments used for Cystoisospora infections in pets: sulfa drugs
(the traditional treatment) and coccidiocidal medications (newer treatment). The most
common medicines used against coccidia are called coccidiostats. They inhibit coccidial
reproduction. Once the numbers stop expanding, it is easier for the patient’s immune
system to catch up and wipe out the infection. This also means, though, that the time it
takes to clear the infection depends on how many coccidia organisms there are to start
with and how strong the patient’s immune system is. A typical treatment course lasts
about a week or two, but it is important to realize that the medication should be given until
the diarrhea resolves plus an extra couple of days. Medication should be given for at least
five days in total. Sometimes courses as long as a month are needed. In dogs and cats,
sulfa-based antibiotics are the most commonly used coccidiostats.
There are newer medications that actually kill the coccidia outright: ponazuril and
toltrazuril, both actually being farm animal products that can be compounded into
concentrations more appropriate for dogs and cats. These medications are able to curtail
a coccidial infection in only a few doses and have been used in thousands of shelter
puppies and kittens with no adverse effects. Their use is becoming more popular used in
kennels, catteries, and animal shelters and you may be pleasantly surprised to find one of
them in stock at your regular veterinary office.
Can People or other Pets Become Infected?
While there are species of coccidia that can infect people - Toxoplasma and
Cryptosporidium, for example - the Cystoisospora species of dogs and cats cannot infect
people. Other pets may become infected from exposure to infected fecal matter but it is
important to note that this is usually an infection of the young (i.e. the immature immune
system tends to let the coccidia infection reach large numbers whereas the mature
immune system probably will not.) In most cases, the infected new puppy or kitten does
not infect the resident adult animal.
Decontaminating the home environment may also be recommended by your veterinarian.
Since the oocysts are resistant to most commonly used disinfectants, prompt removal of
all stool, then scrubbing any soiled areas with a detergent, will be the best environmental
measure.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951548&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156891
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951548&ind=173&objTypeID=1007 2/3

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951548&ind=173&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 28, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
See the article
summary below.
What is Colitis?
In brief, colitis is the
term for inflammation of
the colon. The chief
feature of colitis is
frequently jelly-like,
and/or liquid diarrhea
featuring mucus, fresh blood, or both. The stool may start normal then finish soft or may
seem gooey throughout. There is often accompanying cramping, gas, and a sense of
immediate urgency (the sudden need to run for a bathroom). Vomiting can be a feature of
this condition though the characteristic diarrhea is the hallmark. Colitis may be acute
(lasting only a few days) or chronic (lasting weeks or months on end). Even in chronic
cases, weight loss is usually not a feature of this condition.
What and Where is the Colon?
The colon is another term for the large or lower intestine. For those who do not know the
lower intestine from the upper intestine, the colon/lower intestine is the last segment of the
digestive tract. Before reaching the colon, food has been extensively processed. It has
already been chewed up in the mouth, acid-treated in the stomach, and enzyme-treated in
the small intestine. Most of the nutrients have already been absorbed by the time the
undigestible leftovers have passed down to this last part of the GI tract.
But the digestive tract is not through with the food remnants quite yet and this is where the
business of the colon comes in. The colon has three functions: absorbing water, storing
stool, and further digesting unabsorbed nutrients. The bacterial population in the colon is
about 10 times more dense than that of the small intestine. These bacteria, often referred
to as good or beneficial bacteria, take fibers that were undigestible to the host and
process them into biochemicals that provide nourishment to the colon cells. The bacteria
that live in the colon not only feed the cells of the colon, but they also control the pH of the
colon environment so that excreted toxins are trapped in the stool and will be pooped
away rather than reabsorbed back into the body. They also produce flatulent gases and
pigments that lead to the ultimate color of stool. The relationship we have with our colon
bacteria is mutually beneficial and is an excellent example of symbiosis.
Diarrhea Can Come from Either the Small Intestine or the Large Intestine and the Approach
is Different in Either Case

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 1/6
In classifying diarrhea, it is important to determine whether the problem originates from
the small intestine, the colon, or possibly both. Small intestinal diarrheas tend to be more
serious as they involve fundamental problems with obtaining nutrients from food.
Diarrheas of the colon are less debilitating but still uncomfortable. The following are
characteristics of large intestinal diarrhea:
Large intestinal diarrheas are generally not associated with weight loss, and
patients generally have normal energy levels and normal appetites.
Large intestinal diarrhea is associated with straining to defecate. Often, this
straining is unproductive, leading to the erroneous conclusion that the patient is
constipated.
There is cramping, flatulence, and a sudden sense of urgency. The pet may not
be able to get to an appropriate area before the diarrhea erupts.
There is often mucus or slime in the stool
There is often fresh blood in the stool.
The stool may begin looking normal and formed but finish as a puddle.
A diagnosis of colitis is generally straightforward given the above classic findings, though
how to proceed depends on the signs. Is the problem acute (i.e., suddenly there) chronic
(has been happening for several weeks regularly), or episodic (happens then goes away,
then happens again)?
Colitis Suddenly (Acute Colitis)
A pet that has sudden symptoms of colitis probably has stress-related colitis (common
after boarding, moving, severe weather, or other changes) or dietary indiscretion-related
colitis (usually involves treats or raiding the garbage). These episodes are generally minor
and may be treated with medications and dietary therapy depending on the possible
cause.
Parasites, especially Giardia and whipworms, can also cause colitis and the pet may be
tested for those to rule them out or be dewormed. In general, a few days of medication
and a bland diet should resolve the problem and the pet will be back to normal quickly.
During recovery, it is common for the pet to have no stool at all for a couple of days. This
is normal and not a sign of constipation. If, however, the pet's diarrhea is not clearly
improved in two to three days, contact the veterinarian to see if further testing is needed.
Diagnosing the Cause of Colitis
If the symptoms of colitis have been going on for a month or more or if they keep recurring
and resolving over and over, then a medical workup is needed. It is important to make
sure simple causes of colitis have been ruled out, so parasite testing becomes especially
important.
A thorough physical exam, basic blood panel, and urinalysis are in order as they are with
any chronic disease to assess the patient's general health. A fecal examination for worms
and coccidia plus additional testing for Giardia should be performed. If any of these tests
are positive, then obviously the parasite in question can be addressed; it is always best to
identify the cause of the colitis if it is possible to do so. That said, even if these tests are
negative, it is still a good idea to include a broad spectrum de-worming and coccidia
treatment, which should probably be given as these treatments are safe and inexpensive.
Whipworms, in particular, are difficult to detect and commonly cause colitis symptoms. We
want to be sure we have ruled out the simple causes of colitis before more advanced
diagnostics begin.
After all the preliminaries above are covered, the patient is assessed for treatment. Your
veterinarian may recommend medications based on the exam and testing results, and
testing may need to continue to the next level. Most reference labs now can do PCR

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 2/6
(DNA) testing for more obscure organisms such as Tritrichomonas in cats,
Cryptosporidium in dogs and cats, and more. This testing uses a fecal sample and can be
used to non-invasively rule out unique infections.
The last step in colitis diagnostics is a colonoscopy with biopsies with the idea of
examining colon tissue under a microscope to classify the inflammation. Depending on the
type of cells infiltrating the colon lining, the colitis can be classified as
lymphocytic/plasmacytic (a form of inflammatory bowel disease), histiocytic (which tends
to stem from a type of E. coli infection,) or not truly colitis at all and the entire problem may
be the psychosomatic condition known as irritable bowel syndrome. All these conditions
have different treatments.
A colonoscopy requires a period of fasting (usually a couple of days) and enemas or some
other kind of fluid to clear the colon of residual stool so the naked tissue of the colon can
be viewed and sampled. Referral to a specialty hospital is likely needed. Colonoscopy is
performed under general anesthesia and not every patient is a candidate for that, plus
expense may be a concern. These disadvantages must be weighed against the quality
and quantity of information that can be obtained by evaluating a tissue sample from the
colon.
Depending on your pet's specific case and the cause of colitis, your
veterinarian may or may not recommend antibiotics.
Management Tips for Colitis
Colitis is best managed when its cause is known and specific therapy can be started.
When this is not possible, your veterinarian may treat your pet’s clinical signs (nausea,
pain, loose stools, hydration level) and recheck them after a few days. Treatment plans
may include medications to target different clinical signs as mentioned above.
The following are therapeutic medications and strategies that may be prescribed to treat
colitis.
Antibiotics
Different schools of thought exist regarding the use of antibiotics in diarrhea cases without
knowing if certain bacteria are to blame.
• Many factors contribute to colitis (your pet’s immunity, eating garbage, drinking pond
water, etc.).
• Antibiotic use in general (not specifically linked to colitis use) can cause the amount of
good gut bacteria to be changed, leading to changes in your pet’s overall gut health.
• Antibiotic resistance is another factor your veterinarian may consider.
Metronidazole and Tylosin
These medications are antibiotics that kill harmful organisms like some bacteria and
protists (such as Giardia).
Sulfasalazine
This medication consists of a sulfa antibiotic bound to a salicylate anti-inflammatory. The
sulfa bond protects the anti-inflammatory medication until it gets to the large intestine,
thus saving the anti-inflammatory effect for the disease of the large intestine. This is an
effective medication but is typically given three times a day, which may be inconvenient for
owners. Cats are sensitive to salicylates, thus this medication is primarily used in dogs.

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Dietary Fiber
The role of fiber in colitis is confusing as there is an assortment of fiber preparations
(soluble fibers, insoluble fibers, and mixtures). In general, colitis is felt to be a fiberresponsive disease, but there are so many combinations of fiber types that it is hard to
know what the patient may be responding to. Insoluble fibers, like cellulose, bulk up the
stool and stimulate the colon lining. This may not be what is in order if the colon is already
irritated although giving some structure to diarrhea may be a good thing. Soluble fibers,
like psyllium, are fermented by the colon bacteria into nutrients for the colon cells, which
helps them heal. Prescription high-fiber diets often have a mixture of soluble and insoluble
fibers that have been scientifically determined to help colitis patients. Alternatively, a low
residue diet (one of high digestibility) could be used and soluble fiber added to it. The idea
with this strategy is to have maximum intestinal absorption of nutrients in the small
intestine so less material enters the colon, but once the material gets there the soluble
fibers added help the colon cells to heal.
Prebiotics such as Fructooligosaccharides (FOS)
Prebiotics are basically food for beneficial colon bacteria. Feeding a diet rich in prebiotics
promotes a healthy colon bacterial population, which in turn helps resolve diarrhea.
Fructooligosaccharides are carbohydrates involving fructose (fruit sugar) units attached to
glucose (starch sugar) units. Regular dietary carbohydrates are digested by the bacteria
of the small intestine, leaving only the undigested fibers and other dregs for the teeming
masses of the large intestine. FOSs are not fibers but they are digested in the large
intestine (not the small intestine) in the same way that fibers are, yielding the same
biochemicals that fibers do. Why is this good? Tests in healthy animals indicate that this
will help remove pathogenic bacteria from the large intestine and promote the growth of
helpful bacteria. Think of it as an anti-crime program in the New York City of bacteria.
Diets that contain FOSs or other prebiotics may help manage colitis. Several such diets
are available.
Probiotics
A probiotic is a protected culture of live helpful bacteria that can colonize the patient's
intestine. The bacteria must be protected from the acid of the stomach to survive to the
lower intestine. Once there, the bacteria make a home and make by-products that are
nourishing to the intestinal and local immune system cells. There are numerous products
on the market for both humans and animals; the problem has been that since these
products are not regulated as drugs by the FDA, they are required only to be safe, not
necessarily effective. A recent study found that most such products do not contain the live
cultures they are advertised to contain. If you want to add a probiotic to a pet's regimen,
we recommend sticking to well-established veterinary companies. That said, probiotics
are mainly made to colonize the small intestine, not the large intestine, so their benefit in
colitis is still somewhat speculative.
Elimination Diet
Colitis can result from a food intolerance (an example would be lactose intolerance from
which numerous people suffer). Intolerances can result from dyes, preservatives,
contaminants, or even natural proteins in the food. Similarly, colitis can result from an
actual food allergy. The solution for these intolerances is to feed a "pure" diet, ideally,
home-cooked food made with carbohydrates and proteins that are novel or new to the
patient. An 8 to 10-week diet course is typically needed and no other chews or treats can
be eaten during the trial. Food allergy cannot be diagnosed by blood tests or skin tests. At
this time, response to an elimination diet is the only test for food allergy or intolerance.

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 4/6
Most people are not in a position to home-cook an appropriate food for their pet.
Fortunately, several novel protein diets and hydrolyzed protein diets have been
developed. For more details on using an elimination diet, see our food allergy page.
Prednisone is the cornerstone of treatment for inflammatory bowel disease, which must be
diagnosed by biopsy. Sometimes a trial course of this medication is suggested for colitis
but it is important to keep in mind that such trials can interfere with future diagnostics and
can create some degree of immune suppression. Prednisolone could be disastrous in the
event of E. coli-related histolytic colitis, for example. Many patients with inflammatory
bowel disease are never able to fully discontinue prednisolone, so be sure to discuss the
pros and cons of attempting this therapy without a biopsy.
Histiocytic Ulcerative Colitis: A Specific Form of Colitis
This condition is also called Boxer colitis because the Boxer breed seems predisposed.
This form of colitis is particularly ulcerative and involves infiltration of the tender colon
lining with cells called histiocytes. These cells are the cells that are normally called into
the scene of inflammation relatively late so that they can absorb the dead cells and debris
that have been created by the inflammatory event.
Dogs with this condition typically show symptoms at an early age (less than two years)
and become more debilitated than typical colitis patients. It is currently believed that this
condition results from an inappropriate immune response against the common bacteria of
the colon, especially E. coli. Dogs with this form of colitis do not respond well to the usual
remedies listed above but instead seem to show an excellent response to the antibiotic
enrofloxacin. This antibiotic is particularly effective against gram-negative bacteria (so
classified because of their cell wall's staining properties when tested). It has thus been
inferred that these bacteria are at the root of the problem.
Histiocytic ulcerative colitis can be confirmed by biopsy, although signs of colitis in a
young Boxer are highly suggestive of this condition.
In Summary:
The colon is another term for the large or lower intestine.
The colon has three functions: absorbing water, storing stool, and further
digesting unabsorbed nutrients.
 Inflammation of the colon is called colitis. Diarrhea is a characteristic sign;
the condition may be accompanied by cramping, gas, and vomiting. Weight
loss is usually not a feature.
 Colitis may be acute (lasting only a few days) or chronic (lasting weeks or
months).
There are “good’, or “helpful” bacteria that live in the colon and small
intestine.
 It is important to find whether diarrhea originates from the small intestine,
the colon, or possibly both.
 Small intestinal diarrhea tends to be more serious as it prevents food
nutrients from being absorbed.
 Diarrhea of the colon is less debilitating but is still uncomfortable.
Acute (or sudden) colitis can be stress-related or dietary, is usually mild,
and can be cleared up with a short course of medication or a change in
diet.
 Chronic, or recurrent, episodes of colitis mean the signs have been going
on for a month or more, and this means a medical workup will probably be
recommended by your veterinarian.

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 5/6
 Colitis is best managed when the cause is known and specific therapy
can be started.
 Many different parasites can cause colitis, including coccidia and giardia.
 Food intolerance from dyes, preservatives, contaminants, or even natural
proteins in the food can cause colitis.
 If other reasons have not been found, the last step in colitis diagnostics is
a colonoscopy with biopsies to examine colon tissue under the microscope
to classify the inflammation.
Antibiotics may or may not be prescribed depending on your pet's
situation.
An elimination diet to narrow down foods that may not be tolerated by
your pet can be helpful.
 Dietary fibers and pro- and pre-biotics may be suggested, as soluble
fibers ferment by colon bacteria into nutrients, which help the colon heal.
Prescription high-fiber diets often have a mixture of soluble and insoluble
fibers that have been scientifically determined to help colitis patients.
 Histiocytic Ulcerative Colitis, also called Boxer colitis, is a condition in
which the Boxer breed seems predisposed. This form of colitis is
particularly ulcerative and involves infiltration of the tender colon lining with
cells called histiocytes. Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951545&pid=19239
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156914
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:18 PM Colitis-Related Diarrhea in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951545&ind=174&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 30, 2025
Published: January 01, 2001
See article summary below.
Simple Constipation
An occasional episode of constipation is not cause for alarm. When a pet is constipated,
stools seem unusually hard, and there is unproductive straining. Hard stools might be
found in unusual locations. Veterinary assistance may or may not be needed. Here is what
you need to know if you think your pet is constipated.
One of the purposes of the colon (large intestine) is to store stool. Many pet
owners become alarmed if their pet has not passed a stool in a few days,
especially in a post-anesthetic situation. In fact, the colon can easily store
several weeks’ worth of stool, so if only a few days have passed, it may be
worthwhile to wait a little longer. If your pet seems to be uncomfortable or
straining unproductively, then it is probably time for intervention.
Why do pets get constipated? Straining unproductively can be a symptom of
either constipation or large intestinal diarrhea. In either case, small amounts of
mucous, gooey, or even blood-tinged stool can be passed and there is a lot of
pushing involved. Difficulty urinating can also appear as straining. The point is
that if all you have noticed is straining, it may not be constipation. Straining to
urinate is often an emergency situation so if there is any question about the
pet’s ability to urinate, see the veterinarian right away.
It may be tempting to buy a commercially prepared enema at the drug store
and attempt to relieve the pet’s problem at home. However, some commercially
prepared products are toxic to pets, so it is important that human constipation
products, be they enemas or laxatives, not be used in pets without specific
veterinary instruction.
Simple constipation can be caused by any number of reasons. Some animals excessively
groom themselves (especially if they are itchy) and find themselves passing stools
containing large amounts of hair. This is not an uncommon cause of constipation, and
often, treatment for excessive grooming is helpful.
Some animals, especially dogs, get in the habit of eating gravel, stones, dirt, bones, or
plants. This does not usually indicate a dietary deficiency, as many owners suspect,
although there does not seem to be a good explanation for this unusual dietary behavior.

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Did you say "cat enema???" Photo Courtesy DepositPhotos
The stools produced can be sharp or painful to pass, often leading to straining and
discomfort.
Some medications can have constipation as a side effect (sucralfate).
An important potential cause of constipation to check for is an electrolyte imbalance,
especially in an older pet. This may be the only noticeable sign of an important metabolic
problem, such as insufficient kidney function. If constipation has been a recurring problem,
then this kind of lab work database becomes especially important.
An internal obstruction may be causing the problem. For example, animals hit by cars
often suffer a fractured pelvis. These usually heal without surgery but can heal such that
the pelvic canal through which stool must pass is narrowed. Constipation may not result
for years after the initial trauma. An old fracture is generally obvious with a radiograph of
the abdomen.
Alternatively, an enlarged prostate gland is a common feature of older male dogs. The
gland sits just below the colon and can press on it, narrowing it. Neutering usually solves
this problem, though sometimes the problem is more serious, such as a prostate tumor.
An enlarged prostate is often palpable rectally, though the size of the prostate is better
assessed with a radiograph.
Treatment for Simple Constipation
Simply isolated episodes of constipation
are easily treated with a DSS, soap and
water, or K-Y jelly-based enema. It is
important to appreciate that pets do not
take kindly to enemas, and this kind of
procedure should not be attempted at
home. It invites bites and scratches,
especially if the patient is uncomfortable to
begin with, and it is a messy undertaking.
Enemas are best left to experienced
professional staff.
A short course of medication may be
prescribed. This might be stool softeners
such as laxatone, lactulose, polyethylene
glycol 3350 (Miralax®), or DSS or it might
be a medication to increase the normal
motility (contractile strength) of the large
intestine such as cisapride or bisacodyl
(Dulcolax®).
An old-fashioned remedy has been mineral
oil taken orally (by mouth). It is best to
avoid this temptation because mineral oil is
a petroleum oil without flavor and it is
easily inhaled into the respiratory tract
accidentally when it gets in the mouth. Since it is a mineral-based compound, it cannot
ever be removed by the body and the immune system will forever attempt to wall it off with
inflammatory granulomas.
For a single episode of constipation, a diet change may or may not be recommended.
There are two approaches that are commonly employed in this regard. The first is the
addition of fiber to the diet. Fiber is not absorbed by the patient’s intestinal tract and
passes to the colon where it contributes to the stool volume. The result is a larger, more
bulky stool which, when passed, provides stronger sensory stimulation to the colon than a
regular stool. This increased stimulation may result in better colon motility. This type of

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 2/7
diet change is achieved most easily by switching to one of the prescription high-fiber diets
formulated for this exact use; most manufacturers of therapeutic pet foods include such
diets in their offerings. If this is not acceptable to the pet, fiber may be added to the
regular diet in the form of:
Canned pumpkin
Bran cereal
Metamucil, Konsyl, Siblin or similar product
Your veterinarian can instruct you as to how much you should add.
The second theory of dietary management is that the colon would perform better with a
smaller stool. In this case, a low-residue, high-digestibility diet is used. With such a diet, a
greater amount of nutrients is absorbed by the patient and there is less undigested
material passing to the colon to contribute to the fecal mass. One of the problems with
constipation is that stool becomes dry when water is absorbed by the colon, making the
stool harder to pass. The aforementioned high-fiber diets tend to absorb water and
potentially make constipation worse whereas low-residue diets help preserve fecal water
and create a softer stool.
Recurring Constipation
In recurring constipation, the same treatment methods as listed above are employed but
on a more long-term basis. Enemas may have to be used more frequently and
medications/diet changes may represent permanent management methods. The lab work
database and the abdominal radiographs become especially important.
Some additional comments regarding the long-term use of the above methods:
Lactulose is an especially thick and overly sweet liquid and many animals find
its taste objectionable (though cats are reportedly unable to taste the
sweetness component). The objectionable taste frequently leads to drooling out
the medicine into the fur of the chin and ruff. This may become a grooming or
cosmetic problem.
Bisacodyl works by stimulating the pelvic nerves to increase the motility of the
colon. It has been suggested that this kind of nerve stimulation should not be
done indefinitely; thus this medication is typically recommended in a finite
course.
Polyethylene glycol 3350 (Miralax powder) acts by pulling water from the body
into the intestinal tract during stool formation, leading to a wetter, more pliant
stool. The product is typically given twice daily in food and is generally well
tolerated by pets though some trial and error is often needed to find an
acceptable dose.
Cisapride has a broad dose range depending on individual response. Often a
more conservative dose is selected to start. If this does not appear to be
effective, there is a good chance that there is room to increase the dose. Do not
change a drug dose on your own! If you think the cisapride dose you have been
using is ineffective, notify your veterinarian and ask if a higher dose might be a
good idea.
While neutering usually resolves most enlarged prostate problems, an old
pelvic fracture may or may not necessarily be helped by surgically repairing the

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 3/7
A large fecal mass is visible in the colon. Photo by Dr. Robert Gaskin
bones. If the above medical management is not effective, the subtotal
colectomy (see below) may become needed.
Constipation vs Obstipation
When constipation
becomes a more
permanent and
continuous problem, it is
more correct to use the
term obstipation. Here,
patients are unable to
effectively or completely
empty the colon on their
own (70% of affected
cats are male, 30%
female). The obstipated
colon is dilated and
packed with an
enormous, rock-hard
burden of feces. The
patient is usually quite
uncomfortable, with
more frequent
unproductive straining,
lethargy, appetite loss,
and even vomiting entering the picture. Small hard bits of the stool is often found around
the house as well as in the litter box. Sometimes liquid fecal secretions are passed around
the hard fecal mass, leading the owner to incorrectly think the pet has diarrhea.
Usually, the only way to relieve this is through a more complete de-obstipation process,
which frequently necessitates general anesthesia. The patient is hydrated, usually using
fluids given under the skin and some enemas are given while the patient is awake. This
helps moisten the hard fecal mass and sometimes helps with fecal evacuation. After this,
the patient is anesthetized and the fecal mass is milked from the colon by hand. If the
colon is severely backed up, often a single procedure is incompletely effective as some of
the stool that is higher up may not be accessible at the time of the procedure.
There is no way to predict the frequency with which this procedure must be performed in a
given individual; you must simply judge the patient’s discomfort to determine this.
At some point, repeated use of anesthesia may represent an undesirable expense or risk.
At this point, home enemas may be reconsidered. As previously mentioned, this is a
messy procedure that pets do not appreciate in the least. Your vet will need to show you
the equipment and supplies as there are many different products available. The procedure
will need to be done in an area that can be mopped or hosed off afterward (an outdoor
area, for example). Often the patient will require a bath afterwards. For many pet owners,
this is simply not something they want to do but for some people, this can be a valuable
management procedure that can save a great deal of veterinary expense.
High-fiber diets are not appropriate after a patient has progressed from simple
constipation to obstipation.
Subtotal Colectomy - A Permanent Solution
The subtotal colectomy involves the removal of 90% of the colon, leaving only a small
section at the colon's beginning. This procedure generally eliminates the need for any
stool softeners, pills, enemas, etc., and the patient can resume a “low maintenance”

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 4/7
lifestyle. The constipation is replaced by diarrhea at first, though by six weeks post-op,
80% of cats have returned to a soft/formed stool. For dogs, this may continue for a longer
period. Both dogs and cats will have an increased frequency of defecation, which can be
problematic for dogs requiring outdoor access, whereas cats will simply use the litter box
more often. This also improves over time.
Patients appear much more comfortable with this new arrangement and most owners are
so satisfied with results as to wish they had pursued surgical treatment sooner. Still, it is
important to realize that the subtotal colectomy is a major surgery, and there are special
problems to be concerned about:
The colon’s bacterial population is enormous (some ten times higher than the
bacterial population of the small intestine). This introduces special concern for
any leaking from the intestinal incision. Infection could easily progress to
peritonitis and become a lethal complication. This is by no means a common
problem, but it is important to report any post-operative lethargy or appetite
issues immediately, especially if the patient appears to be stabilizing and the
change is sudden. Leaking after intestinal surgery generally occurs around the
third day after surgery if it is going to occur. Fever is a sign of infection, but it is
best not to attempt to take a rectal temperature at home, given the proximity of
the colon incision. Your pet will probably be going home on antibiotics.
Special diets are often recommended during the recovery period. (Usually
something highly digestible to minimize the amount of stool produced.) For
some patients this diet must be continued for life.
It is not unusual for a patient to refuse food for several days after surgery. Cats,
especially, must not be allowed to go without food for more than five days
without some kind of nutritional support. This may require some form of
assisted feeding.
Scarring of the surgery site (“stricture”) may lead to narrowing of the bowel and
recurrence of the obstipation. If this occurs a second surgery would be
necessary to remove the narrowed area. This complication is rare.
Surgery may not work or constipation issues may recur (average time of
approx. 1 year for recurrence). There is also a 14% mortality rate associated
with this surgery.
Most pets do not experience complications with this surgery beyond the initial loose stool
mentioned. Results are described as “good to excellent.”
In Summary:
Some causes of constipation:
Side effects of some medications
Excessive grooming causes feces to contain hair
Eating gravel, rocks, bones, plants
An electrolyte imbalance, especially in an older pet
An internal obstruction, perhaps from being hit by a car even years ago
Simple constipation can be caused by any number of reasons. The colon can easily
store several weeks’ worth of stool so if only a few days have passed, waiting a bit is
reasonable if the pet is not straining without going.
Treatment of one episode:
Can be treated with veterinary enema, and possibly stool softeners or
laxatives recommended by your veterinarian
Add fiber to the diet

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Use a low-residue, high-digestibility diet
Some commercially prepared enemas for people are toxic to pets; do not give one
without discussing it with your veterinarian. Enemas for pets whose colons are filled
and cannot pass it are painful and first need sedation.
Recurring constipation uses the same treatments but on a long-term, possibly
permanent, basis.
Some medical options for treating recurring constipation:
Lactulose, although it is a thick sweet liquid, and many animals find its
taste objectionable
Dulcolax stimulates the pelvic nerves to increase movement in the colon
MiraLAX powder pulls water from the body into the intestinal tract, leading
to a wetter, more pliant stool.
Cisapride provides improved movement of contents from the stomach to
the colon.
Obstipation occurs when constipation becomes an ongoing problem, and they are
unable to empty their colon.
The obstipated colon is extended and packed with an enormous, rock-hard
burden of feces.
High-fiber diets are not appropriate after a patient has progressed from
simple constipation to obstipation.
Usually, the only way to relieve obstipation is through a more complete deobstipation process, which frequently necessitates general anesthesia. The
patient is hydrated and might be given an enema while awake because it
moistens the hard fecal mass. After this, the patient is anesthetized, and
the fecal mass is milked from the colon by hand. Often a single procedure
doesn’t finish the job as some of the stool that is higher up may not be
accessible at the time of the procedure.
At some point, repeated use of anesthesia may become too expensive or
risky. At this point, home enemas may be reconsidered for obstipated pets.
Megacolon is obstipation in which the colon’s muscles have stretched so much that
the colon becomes three or four times larger than normal and stays stretched that
way. The colon muscles are unable to push feces into the rectum, so a lot of feces
remain in the enlarged colon. The combination of the enlarged colon and obstipation
is called megacolon.
For cats, a permanent solution called subtotal colectomy is surgically removing the
stretched-out colon, though it is not nearly as effective in dogs. This procedure
generally eliminates the need for any stool softeners, pills, enemas, etc. and the
patient can resume a low-maintenance lifestyle. The subtotal colectomy is a major
surgery with specific concerns:
The colon’s bacterial population is enormous, and the incision can leak.
Infection can progress to peritonitis and become a lethal complication.
Specific recovery diets may need to be used permanently.
Cats may refuse food for several days afterward but must not be allowed to
go without food for more than 5 days without nutritional support.
Scarring may lead to a narrowed bowel, causing obstipation again. A
second surgery would be necessary to remove that narrowed area.
Results are usually described as good to excellent.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951509&pid=19239

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 6/7
49950c8e-8700-4853-bf92-4c73b3244bc2.1754156937
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Constipation and Megacolon in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951509&ind=175&objTypeID=1007 7/7
Leaving things on the floor where the dog or puppy can
reach it gives the dog easy access to things to chew.
Photo by VIN
Destructive Chewing by Puppies and Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: September 04, 2019
Published: May 09, 2017
Destructive chewing is a common problem in
puppies and adult dogs.
Chewing by puppies is a natural, normal
behavior. Puppies chew because they’re
teething, they're playing, they're learning
about their environment, they’re trying to
escape from their kennel, etc.
One of the main ways puppies learn about
their world is to put things in their mouths
and chew on them. It is unlikely that you will
be able to stop normal chewing behavior
completely in puppies. Trying to stop a
normal but unwanted behavior can cause
stress and anxiety, and lead to more serious
behavior problems.
Teething occurs in puppies up to eight months of age. That means chewing problems can
be worse in younger animals than in older ones.
Adult dogs may be destructive chewers because they have separation anxiety, they're
playing, they’re hungry, they don’t get enough exercise, they weren’t properly trained as
puppies, etc.
How can you minimize the damage to your home and household?
The basic methods are to keep your puppy/dog busy, prevent access to things that you
don't want damaged, and provide your pet with acceptable things to chew.
1. Keep your dog busy. Exercise, fun, reward-based training sessions, playtime,
feeding from food dispensing toys rather than bowls, etc., allow your dog to use
her brain and muscles.
2. Dog proof your house. In other words, keeping things (clothes, children’s toys,
small objects, etc.) that can be destroyed off the floor and out of the dog's
reach. Keep closets, drawers, and toy boxes closed. Take objects off of any
surface the dog can reach.
3. Supervise your dog. If there are times you cannot watch the dog while she’s
running loose in the house, put her in a secure area (dog kennel, crate,
enclosed room, etc.) or leash her to your belt. If you decide to use a kennel or
crate, you’ll have to acclimatize her to it or she may develop other behavior

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Destructive Chewing by Puppies and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=7998415&ind=176&objTypeID=1007 1/3
problems.
4. If there are items that you cannot prevent your dog from having access to, you
may decide to try deterrents, such as making the area around the object
unpleasant (plastic rug runners or motion/vibration detectors).
5. If you catch your dog chewing an inappropriate object, don't scare her or try to
punish her. Use the treat-in-trade method by offering her a treat or something
else worth trading for; when the pup is clearly invested in the new item, pick up
the discarded one. With swapping, the pup will not fear an owner's approach
when she has something she values because the owner's approach is
generally associated with getting something better! Start using this technique
early in her training and encourage swapping for lots of items so that she can
learn the technique and will learn to readily give up even a highly prized object.
It's always better to reinforce positive behavior than to punish your pet because
punishment can cause anxiety and other undesirable behaviors to develop. Dr
Sophia Yin's book Perfect Puppy in 7 days has more training tips.
6. Provide plenty of acceptable chew toys. What is acceptable depends on the
size of your dog, what she finds appealing, etc. Many items have been
commonly used (large bones, rawhide chews, plastic bones, hooves, Kong
toys, rubber toys, puzzle/foraging toys, dental treats, and so on). However,
some are no longer as acceptable as they once were. Cattle hooves, sterilized
large bones, plastic bones, etc. can damage teeth. Rawhide chews may
become choking hazards if the dog isn’t supervised and the rawhide taken
away when it becomes small enough to be swallowed. Ask your veterinarian or
veterinary dentist for professional preferences on what are safe, acceptable
chew toys. Always raise/reward your dog for chewing appropriate things.
Remember that toys will be destroyed; that's how you know it's a toy your dog
likes.
7. Do not give your dog old shoes, clothes, or children's toys for her to chew on.
Dogs really can’t tell the difference between those items and your “good”
shoes, clothes, etc.
8. If an animal is protecting resources and showing aggression, the animal should
be avoided when it has those items and should have a veterinary behavior
consultation because there may be a more complex problem going on.
9. If these things don't help, or if the destructiveness gets worse, consult your
veterinarian for help.
Destructive behaviors (chewing, barking, digging, etc.) are not only damaging to your
home and possessions, but they can also lead to injury to your dog. Plus, they are a major
reason dogs are taken to animal shelters and humane societies. With a little time and
work, you and your dog should be able to have a good life together and could avoid being
part of those statistics.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=7998415&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754156963

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Destructive Chewing by Puppies and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=7998415&ind=176&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Destructive Chewing by Puppies and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=7998415&ind=176&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: September 15, 2020
The diaphragm is a thin muscle that separates the organs in the chest (heart, lungs) from
the organs in the abdomen. It is also involved in breathing: when the diaphragm contracts,
it helps pull air into the lungs.
A hernia develops when an organ pushes through a weak spot in the muscle around it,
creating a hole.
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being
pushed through a hole in the diaphragm. That hole is the hernia. The hole can be caused
by trauma, such as being hit by a car, or it can be congenital, meaning that the pet was
born with it.
Peritoneopericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia
A certain type of defect that has a big name - peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia -
is not nearly as complicated as it sounds. As we know, the diaphragm is a muscle that
runs between the chest and abdomen. It helps us breathe by affecting the communication
between the double-walled sac that contains the heart and the membrane that lines the
belly. The heart sac is called the pericardium and the membrane is called the peritoneum.
What happens with this type of hernia is that abdominal organs can move through the
hole in the diaphragm directly into the heart sac. Obviously, abdominal organs are not
supposed to be in the heart sac. Usually cats and dogs are born with this type of hernia,
but trauma can also cause it.
Diaphragmatic Hernia Symptoms
When the abdominal organs have moved through the hole in the diaphragm, they become
trapped and lose their blood supply. Misplaced organs in the chest can also crowd the
lungs, or in the case of peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias they can crowd the
heart, preventing pets from breathing normally or letting the heartbeat correctly.
Symptoms can include coughing, poor appetite, laying around more, trouble breathing or
taking rapid and short breaths, fever, and collapse. In some cases, pets can live for many
years without any symptoms, especially if the abdominal organs are able to move easily in
and out of the chest or the hole is too small to allow movement through it. Such hernias
may be found unexpectedly while addressing another problem.
Diagnosing a Hernia
For diagnosis, the veterinarian will perform a thorough physical examination. Sometimes a
veterinarian will become suspicious when they hear tummy grumbles in the chest instead
of in the belly. X-rays of hernias often show abdominal contents in the chest, or unusual
gas patterns or shadows. If the X-rays don’t show an obvious answer, the veterinarian
may give an ultrasound or they may choose a barium series, in which they feed the pet a
type of medicine called barium to highlight the stomach and intestines on additional Xrays.
Treatment

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9808794&ind=177&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Treatment requires surgery to fix the hole in the diaphragm (and heart for
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias) and move the abdominal organs back into the
belly. If the organs are severely damaged from being trapped in the chest, surgery to fix
the damage or remove the entire organ may also be necessary.
Unfortunately, diaphragmatic hernia repair carries some risk because the diaphragm helps
us breathe. Because of this risk, some veterinarians will avoid surgery in pets that do not
show symptoms. The issue with waiting until symptoms occur to perform a risky surgery
means that organ damage may be irreparable by the time surgery is performed, so it is
important to fully discuss the pros and cons of a wait-and-see approach with your
veterinarian.
For pets that do undergo surgical repair, once the pet has fully recovered and healed from
surgery, they are unlikely to experience future issues.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9808794&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754156986
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:19 PM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9808794&ind=177&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Roger Gfeller, DVM, DACVECC; Michael Thomas, DVM; Isaac Mayo; The VIN Emergency Medicine
Consultants
Revised: August 16, 2023
Published: December 31, 1994
Diarrhea is the frequent evacuation of watery stools. Vomiting is the forceful expulsion of
stomach contents through the mouth.
What to Do
Remove all food and water.
Check for signs of dehydration.
If diarrhea and/or vomiting continues or the pet acts ill, seek veterinary
attention.
If no vomiting occurs for 6 to 8 hours, begin to frequently give small amounts of
clear liquids (water, Gatorade, Pedialyte, or other electrolyte solution).
A rule of thumb is to give 1 teaspoon per pound of body weight every 2 or
3 hours throughout the day and night.
If your pet does not vomit the fluid, the following day offer small frequent
meals of boiled hamburger and rice or boiled chicken and rice.
If your pet does not want to eat, starts to vomit, or continues to have diarrhea,
see a veterinarian right away.
Isolate the sick pet from other pets.
Diarrhea and vomiting can quickly lead to serious fluid loss and electrolyte
imbalance, especially in very young or old animals, and those with certain
health issues. Severely dehydrated animals may need to be hospitalized and
receive IV fluids to recover.
What NOT to Do
Do not administer any over-the-counter or prescription medications to your pet
without talking to a veterinarian first.
Do not allow the pet to eat or drink anything until there has been no vomiting for
6 to 8 hours.
Vomiting and diarrhea are associated with a host of problems that are referred to
collectively as gastroenteritis. Some cases are quite severe (e.g., poisoning), and some
are not (e.g., dietary indiscretion). If fever is present, infection may be a cause. Most
infections that cause diarrhea and vomiting are contagious, so it is wise to assume that
other pets might be vulnerable if they are exposed.

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951323&ind=178&objTypeID=1007 1/3
If your pet is not feeling well and has
vomiting and/or diarrhea, see a
veterinarian.
Browse the complete Veterinary
Partner First Aid collection.
Introduction: First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
Bandaging: First Aid
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Bleeding: First Aid
Bloat: First Aid
Burns: First Aid
Can't Breathe: First Aid
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Choking: First Aid
Dehydration: First Aid
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Difficult Birth: First Aid
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Electrocution: First Aid
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fever: First Aid
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
Hypothermia: First Aid
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Nosebleed: First Aid
Paralysis: First Aid
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Shock: First Aid
Snakebite: First Aid
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Sunburn: First Aid
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
Wounds: First Aid
Wrapping Up First Aid
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951323&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157006

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951323&ind=178&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951323&ind=178&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Elevated Liver Enzymes in Dogs
Adam Honeckman, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: April 05, 2024
Published: September 03, 2021
My veterinarian ran some blood
tests and said my dog's liver
enzymes were elevated. What does
that mean?
Your veterinarian may recommend
doing blood tests for a variety of
reasons, such as an annual wellness
screening, prior to scheduling
anesthesia or starting certain
medications, or because your dog is
acting sick. How the liver enzymes
are interpreted depends upon the age
and breed of your dog, history of
certain medications, what (if any)
clinical signs your dog has, as well as
the specific lab results. A lot of times,
the increase in liver enzymes is mild
and self-limiting; rarely, it can indicate
a serious underlying liver disease.
Which of the lab values are the liver enzymes?
The main liver enzymes that your veterinarian may look at include the ALT (alanine
aminotransferase) and ALP (alkaline phosphatase).
Liver enzymes can be elevated from liver disease or can be secondarily affected by other
diseases or processes outside the liver, e.g., pancreatitis (inflammation of the pancreas),
intestinal disease, or certain hormonal diseases such as diabetes or Cushing's disease
(overactive adrenal gland(s) producing too much cortisol). Certain medications, such as
steroids (even in eye or ear medications) or phenobarbital (an antiseizure drug), can also
cause elevations in liver enzymes.
Why are age and breed important?
Puppies will normally have an elevated ALP because ALP also comes from growing
bones, not just liver cells. Some older dogs will have a benign accumulation of water,
carbohydrates, or fat in the liver cells (so-called vacuolar hepatopathy). Others can
develop nodules as an aging change. These diseases typically primarily cause an
elevated ALP and do not really affect liver function or require treatment.
Elevations in ALT and ALP do not necessarily mean the liver is failing or not working
properly. However, your veterinarian may recommend another blood test, called bile acids,
to assess liver function. Another test that can be used to assess how the liver is working is
bilirubin. This is the yellow pigment that builds up in the body when an animal is

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Elevated Liver Enzymes in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10451778&ind=179&objTypeID=1007 1/3
jaundiced. If the bilirubin is increased, this already indicates decreased liver function
(unless the patient is also severely anemic), so bile acid testing in this situation is not
indicated as it will not provide additional information.
Certain breeds are prone to particular diseases. For instance, an older Dachshund
with elevated liver enzymes may have Cushing's syndrome. Labradors, Bedlington
terriers, Westies, and Dobermans are predisposed to chronic hepatitis (inflammation of
the liver). Shelties and Cocker Spaniels are prone to gallbladder problems. The fact that
we see certain diseases in specific breeds suggests that there is a genetic/familial
component to some of them, although other factors also play a role.
My dog isn't having any symptoms. Should I be worried about the elevated liver
enzymes?
Dogs with severe liver disease can have a variety of clinical signs – decreased appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea, neurologic signs, abdominal distention from fluid, and jaundice (yellow
discoloration of gums, eyes, skin, etc). However, some dogs with significant liver disease
may not show any clinical signs in the early stages. It is much better to diagnose and treat
patients before they get sick. As a result, further workup may still be recommended, even
if the dog is not having any clinical signs. An example of this is if your dog has a
persistently increased ALT – this can be the first sign of chronic hepatitis, which can
progress to liver failure. Some cases of chronic hepatitis are due to a toxic build up of
copper in the liver that will continue unless you intervene medically.
If your dog isn't acting sick, your veterinarian may recommend a therapeutic trial of
antibiotics (to rule out a possible infection), antioxidants (such as vitamin E, Denamarin®,
or ursodiol (a drug that increases bile flow and decreases inflammation). After a few
weeks of therapy, the liver values would be rechecked. Further diagnostics would be
warranted if the liver enzymes did not improve.
Besides blood tests, what else can be done to diagnose liver problems?
An abdominal ultrasound may be recommended by your veterinarian. Some diseases,
such as a gallbladder obstruction or liver mass, can be readily identified on ultrasound.
Ultrasound may also be useful to check for other diseases (besides a primary liver
problem) in the abdomen that can affect the liver enzymes, such as pancreatitis.
Some, but not all, dogs with elevated liver enzymes need a liver biopsy to get a diagnosis.
Liver biopsies can be obtained with a needle biopsy instrument using ultrasound guidance
via a scope (laparoscope) or surgery. Oftentimes, the ultrasound is useful to determine if
liver biopsies are needed and which biopsy method is most appropriate. Samples are
taken for histopathology, culture (to rule out infections) and often for measuring copper
levels. Your veterinarian may refer you to a specialist for further workup.
The treatment and prognosis depend on what is causing the elevated liver enzymes. An
optimal treatment plan can be made with your veterinarian once the diagnosis is known.
Julie Allen, DVM, DACVP, DACVIM contributed to this article.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10451778&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157045
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Elevated Liver Enzymes in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10451778&ind=179&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:20 PM Elevated Liver Enzymes in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10451778&ind=179&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Illustration by Dr. Wendy Brooks, animation by Tamara Rees of VIN.
Emptying a Dog or Cat's Anal Sacs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 19, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
More Than You Ever Wanted To Know About Anal Sacs, or Why Is My Pet Scooting?
Should I Do This Myself?
Maybe not. Most people
don't want to do anything
like this and are more
than happy to have a
professional take care of
it. Less squeamish pet
owners may want to try it.
The problem is that no
matter what anal sac
expression technique you
use, it is not generally a
one-person job. Pets
tend not to appreciate
having their anal area
manipulated, and even the most docile animal may bite. Squirming, at the very least, is
expected, so a helper experienced in animal restraint is likely going to be needed to
control the front end of the pet. All things considered, anal sac expression may be
something best left to anal sac professionals.
What On Earth Are Anal Sacs?
Anal sacs (also called anal glands) are two small glands just inside your pet's anus. The
material secreted into these sacs is thick, oily, stinky, and is commonly described as
smelling fishy. Most wild animals can empty these glands voluntarily for scent marking or
in self-defense (like a skunk might do); however, domestic animals have largely lost their
ability to empty these sacs voluntarily. Walking around and normal defecation serve to
empty the sacs, but some animals become unable to empty their sacs on their own at all.
The sacs become impacted and uncomfortable.
Dogs with impacted anal sacs usually scoot their rear on the ground in an attempt to
empty the glands. Some dogs will lick their anal area, and other dogs will chase their tails.
Cats often lick the fur off just under their tails. Some animals are simply vaguely
uncomfortable, holding their tails down, shivering, hiding, or showing reluctance to
walk. Strangely, some animals seem to refer to their discomfort with their ears and scratch
and shake their ears as if they have an ear infection.
What To Do About Scooting?
The first step is to check the anal sacs when any pet has a history of scooting. The anal
sacs can be emptied in one of two ways.

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Emptying a Dog or Cat's Anal Sacs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951501&ind=180&objTypeID=1007 1/3
How to empty the anal sacs. Graphic by Tamara Rees of VIN
Externally: Hold up a
rag or tissue to the
anus and squeeze
both sides of the anal
area. If the secretion is
very pasty, this method
may be inadequate to
empty the sacs.
Internally: Insert a
lubricated, gloved
finger in the anus and
squeeze the sac
between the thumb and forefinger into a tissue held externally. The full anal gland feels
like a grape in the location, as shown in the top illustration. The emptying procedure is
repeated on the opposite side.
What if Scooting Continues?
If scooting continues for more than a few days after sac emptying, the sacs should be rechecked. For some individuals, it takes emptying anal glands several times in a row
before the sacs stay emptied.
If the sacs are empty and scooting is persisting, another cause (such as itchy
skin, tapeworms, or even lower back pain) should be pursued.
What Happens if an Impacted Sac Doesn't Get Emptied?
An abscess can form and rupture out through the skin. This is a painful, messy, and
smelly condition often mistaken for rectal bleeding. If an anal sac abscess forms, it must
be properly treated by your veterinarian. Antibiotics and probably pain medication will be
needed.
How Often Should Anal Sacs Be Emptied?
This is a highly individual situation. The best recommendation is to let the pet tell you
when the sacs are full. If the pet starts scooting again, it is time to bring him in.
What if My Pet's Sacs Seem to Require Emptying All The Time?
To avoid the expense of having the sacs emptied, you can learn to empty them yourself at
home, but most people feel it is well worth having someone else perform this service. A
non-invasive technique that helps some patients is a change to a high-fiber diet. This will
produce a bulkier stool that may be more effective in emptying the sac as it passes by.
There are also assorted supplements marketed for this use that can be tried. Recently,
fiber supplements have been marketed for the same effect. Ask your veterinarian about
fiber options for your pet.
Anal Sacculectomy
If the sacs need to be emptied every few weeks or more, you may opt to have the sacs
permanently removed. This is generally considered to be a relatively simple procedure by
experienced surgeons, but there are some pitfalls a pet owner should be aware of. The
anal sac area is complicated by many local nerves controlling fecal continence, and we do
not want to disrupt these. Further, the fact that any change in the local musculature of the
anal sphincter region can affect fecal continence, and we do not want to disrupt that,
either. (Removing one sac and waiting for complete healing before removing the other sac
will greatly reduce the chance of this particular complication.)

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Emptying a Dog or Cat's Anal Sacs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951501&ind=180&objTypeID=1007 2/3
If the anal glands have ruptured in the past, there can be a lot of scarring, and the
anatomy will be distorted, making surgery more difficult and preservation of the normal
local structures more difficult. Draining tracts can develop after surgery if the gland is not
completely removed, necessitating a second surgery. On the flip side, of course, is that
anal sac expression will never again be needed.
Many people own pets for years without ever learning that anal sacs exist at all,
and the wives' tale that worms cause scooting erroneously continues. If you have
further questions about anal gland disease, ask your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951501&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157071
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Emptying a Dog or Cat's Anal Sacs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951501&ind=180&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Graphic by MarVista Vet
Flatulence in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 07, 2024
Published: October 27, 2008
Imagine
everyone is
gathered
together for a
relaxing
evening of
snacks and
television
when
gradually
there is no
way to avoid
or ignore the
odors being
emitted by the
otherwise
happy family
dog. Jokes abound but really a solution to this problem is wanted, especially if it is
ongoing.
The Science of Flatulence
Flatulence comes from an excess of gases in the intestinal tract. These gases may
represent air that has been swallowed (especially in short-faced/brachycephalic breeds),
gas produced in the biochemical process of digestion, gas diffusion from the bloodstream,
or gases produced by the bacteria that populate the intestinal tract.
Over 99% of the gases that pass from the intestinal tract are odorless; the gases with
objectionable odors are typically those containing hydrogen sulfide.
Flatulence is a normal biological function. A surprising amount of air is swallowed with the
simple act of eating and if this is not burped out, it must exit through the other end. The
amount of air swallowed tends to be increased when dogs feel they must eat quickly or in
the brachycephalic breeds who tend to breathe more by mouth rather than by nose.
Swallowed air tends not to have objectionable odor.
The really stinky gases are produced by colon (large intestine) bacteria. Dietary fiber in
pet food is not readily digestible by the pet’s own enzyme systems but is readily digested
by the gas-producing bacteria of the colon. As these fibers are broken down, gases are
produced. A diet heavy in fibers tends to favor these gas-producing organisms. The more
supportive the intestinal environment, the more bacteria there will be and ultimately more
gas will be produced.
What To Do About It

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Flatulence in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952806&ind=181&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Image courtesy MarVistaVet
The following are easy changes that can be made in your management of the pet:
Feed smaller meals several times
daily instead of one larger daily meal.
Feed a mixture of dry and canned
foods.
Discourage rapid eating by placing
an over-turned small bowl inside the
pet's regular food bowl. This prevents
the pet from taking such a large
mouthful. Commercial puzzle feeding
bowls are also available for this
same purpose.
Avoid soy and peas in the diet.
Avoid any treats containing milk,
cheese or other forms of lactose.
Avoid fruit-based treats.
Change to a high digestibility/low residue diet. There are therapeutic diets sold
at most veterinary offices that would be perfect. Ideally, rice would be the diet's
carbohydrate source.
If possible, walk the dog within 30 minutes of eating so as to encourage
passing gases outside.
Avoid canned foods containing the texturing ingredient carrageenan.
Encourage regular exercise as this keeps intestinal gases moving and prevents
intestinal gasses from pooling/building up.
Changing to a low residue diet means that most of the nutrients of the food are digested
and absorbed by the pet before they reach the colon where the gas-forming bacteria are.
This means there will be less food for the gas-forming organisms, which will ultimately
mean fewer gas-forming organisms and less gas formed. Sometimes just going through a
case and/or bag of a low residue diet solves the problem and the pet can return to a
regular food afterwards. If necessary, the therapeutic diet can become the pet's regular
food. Low-residue diets are available through your veterinarian.
Prescription Low Residue Diets
Changing to a low residue diet means that most of the nutrients of the food are digested
and absorbed by the pet before they reach the colon where the gas-forming bacteria are.
This means there will be less food for the gas-forming organisms, which will ultimately
mean fewer gas-forming organisms and less gas formed. Sometimes just going through a
case and/or bag of such a low residue diet solves the problem and the pet can return to a
regular food afterwards. If necessary, the therapeutic diet can become the pet’s regular
food.
Sometimes Medication is Needed
A carminative is a medication that reduces flatulence. There is an assortment of available
products, but unfortunately most are not helpful or even labeled for animal use. Changing
the diet and ruling out actual intestinal disease are of primary importance in addressing
flatulence. If further therapy is needed, the following products have some basis to suspect
they might work:
Yucca shidigera supplementation
Currently this extract is labeled as a flavoring agent for pet food but it is also available as
an oral supplement. Several studies have shown that it helps decrease the odor in
flatulence.

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Flatulence in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952806&ind=181&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Zinc acetate supplementation
Zinc binds to sulfhydryl compounds in flatulence ultimately serving to deodorize the gas.
Non-absorbable antibiotic
Such antibiotics serve to kill the gas-forming bacteria of the colon and may be helpful as
long as their use is not ongoing. This is not an ideal method, however, as beneficial
bacteria may also be killed off.
Probiotics
There are many ineffective probiotics being marketed so it is important to use one that has
been shown to actually contain live cultures and that its cultures actually withstand
stomach digestion so as to populate the small intestine with beneficial bacteria. It is
unknown if this type of product would really help in flatulence as it is asking a great deal
for such bacteria to travel all the way to the colon and attempt to displace the gas-forming
resident bacteria. That said, there are several veterinary products that are felt to be
reputable: Prostora® Proviable®, Visbiome®, and Fortiflora®. Fortiflora has been shown
to be effective in reducing flatulence.
Prebiotics
Prebiotics are special nutrients included in the diet to support and nourish beneficial
bacteria and promote a healthy microflora in the colon. Special fibers are usually involved.
Use of prebiotics allows the patient to essentially grow their own probiotics right there in
their own colon. There are many intestinal diets that include prebiotic mixtures for this
purpose.
Questionable Products
Activated charcoal tablets
Charcoal works by binding material in the intestinal tract so the material in question is not
absorbed into the body, or in this case, so that the material is sequestered away from gasforming bacteria. The idea is to make nutrients unavailable to gas-forming bacteria.
Unfortunately, activated charcoal tablets are not likely to be effective as the charcoal
binding sites are filled on the journey from mouth to colon and by the time the tablet sees
the gas-forming large bowel bacteria, it has essentially been used up and cannot adsorb
any more material.
Simethicone
Simethicone may control the volume of gas produced but not the odor. It is an antifoaming
agent that reduces gas bubbles.
Pancreatic enzyme supplementation
In the absence of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency, it is unlikely that a patient would be
helped by extra digestive enzymes. Furthermore, this treatment is relatively expensive for
something that only might be helpful.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952806&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157095
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Flatulence in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952806&ind=181&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:21 PM Flatulence in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952806&ind=181&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Gallstones in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Revised: August 07, 2024
Published: November 13, 2020
Background
The liver makes bile to help digest food
and break down fats. Connected to the
liver is the gallbladder, which is a sac-like
organ that stores the bile and releases it
into the intestines through a bile duct.
Sometimes when things go awry,
gallstones form inside the gallbladder.
Gallstones are also called choleliths or
cholelithiasis.
Gallstone Formation and Signs
Gallstones are often made up of parts of
the bile, such as cholesterol, bilirubin, bile
acids, and calcium. Under the right
conditions, these substances can layer
together inside the bile and form a solid
stone. Veterinary scientists aren’t
completely sure why gallstones form.
Sometimes they form because either the
gallbladder isn’t functioning properly or
something is wrong with the bile.
Conditions that make the formation of
gallstones more likely are those that
prevent normal movement of bile into the
intestines, such as gallbladder inflammation (also called cholecystitis), or conditions that
increase the number of different ingredients of bile, such as increased calcium,
cholesterol, or triglycerides.
In some cases, gallstones don’t cause the pet any problems, and no clinical signs or
issues are noticed; however, gallstones can sometimes lead to cholecystitis
and/or cholangitis, which are painful inflammatory conditions of the gallbladder and its
ducts. Gastrointestinal signs, such as vomiting or throwing up, diarrhea or loose stool,
poor appetite, and sometimes a yellow tinge to the skin and eyes (jaundice) may be seen.
Should gallstones block the bile duct, bile may overfill the gallbladder, causing it to
eventually burst (rupture) like a water balloon, which is a life-threatening, very painful
emergency. If this happens, dogs and cats may become weak or faint.
Gallbladder rupture is a life-threatening emergency.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Gallstones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9933413&ind=182&objTypeID=1007 1/3
A ruptured gallbladder is a worst-case scenario; most animals with gallstones don’t have
any signs of disease and live normal lives.
Diagnosis
To diagnose gallstones, a veterinarian will perform a
thorough physical examination. The tummy will be
felt (palpated), and signs of pain around the
gallbladder area (the upper part of the belly under
the last few ribs) will be checked. Bloodwork will
likely be run to check for liver changes; increased
bilirubin, calcium, or cholesterol in the blood; and to
look for evidence of inflammation, dehydration, or
infection. Next, x-rays will be taken to see if any
stones are visible. Unfortunately, only about 50% of
gallstones can be seen on x-rays. An ultrasound of
the belly may also be needed. This allows the
veterinarian to check the size of the gallbladder;
look for signs of bile inside the belly; confirm
gallstones; make sure the liver looks healthy; and
see if the bile duct is blocked. These tests can also help the veterinarian determine what
caused the stones so that steps can be taken to prevent more from forming.
Treatment
In all cases, treatment will depend on what signs your pet is experiencing. If the pet is not
showing any signs of an issue, there likely isn’t any treatment needed other than watching
and waiting. The veterinarian will probably want to monitor the pet periodically with
bloodwork, x-rays, and/or ultrasound to ensure the stones don’t change or cause
discomfort.
If your pet is showing signs of duct obstruction or pain, surgery to remove the gallstones
and often the entire gallbladder may be necessary. If the gallbladder bursts, emergency
surgery to remove it and uncontained bile from inside the belly is needed immediately.
(Remember, a ruptured gallbladder is a life-threatening emergency.) Hospitalization and
intensive care are often required after gallbladder surgery.
Sometimes medications that protect the liver, such as ursodiol or SAMe, will be prescribed
to help keep the liver healthy. Antibiotics may also be given if an infection is suspected or
if the gallbladder ruptured.
Prognosis and Summary
For pets that don’t show signs of gallstones, the long-term risk for issues is low. Bile duct
obstruction may occur, but it’s not common.
For pets that need surgery, the chance for improvement is good, but gallbladder surgery
can be risky. If bile leaks into the belly, pets can become extremely ill and may die. For
pets that need emergency surgery because their gallbladder ruptured, chances of
improvement are much lower than those whose gallbladder didn’t burst. Pets that survive
the surgery may need to be hospitalized for a long time before they can safely be sent
home to continue to improve.
If you suspect your pet has gallstones, call your veterinarian for a checkup. Fortunately,
gallstones are not common, but the signs could be caused by something else that needs
to be treated. If your pet was recently diagnosed with gallstones, be sure to follow all your
veterinarian’s instructions and give all medications as prescribed. Contact your
veterinarian about any questions or concerns, especially if your pet does not improve.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Gallstones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9933413&ind=182&objTypeID=1007 2/3
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9933413&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157119
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Gallstones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9933413&ind=182&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Electron micrograph of a Giardia trophozoite. Photo
courtesy CDC
Giardia in Pets
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 12, 2023
Published: September 15, 2006
See the article summary below.
What is Giardia?
Giardia are single-celled organisms,
infectious to many types of animals
(including humans) all over the world. As
you can see in the above image, Giardia
organisms have little whip-like tentacles
called flagella that classify them as
flagellates. They use their flagella to move
around from place to place, but when they
find a spot where they wish to stay (like a
cozy nook in the host's intestine), they use a
suction cup-like structure (visible in the
image) to attach. Their presence in the host
intestine can cause diarrhea, though some
hosts are symptom-free carriers. Different
types of Giardia infect different types of
animals; it is rare for Giardia from a pet to
transmit to a human; furthermore, dog and
cat Giardia species are separate and are
unlikely to cross from dog to cat or vice
versa.
Giardia has two forms: the trophozoite and the cyst. The trophozoite is the form that lives
within the host, swimming around and attaching with its suction cup. The cyst, however, is
the form that lives out in the environment. Trophozoites round up to cysts as they
approach the colon and then are passed in feces. Trophozoites that don't round up into
cysts and form shells before passing into the cold, cruel world cannot withstand the
temperature/moisture variability of the outside world. Cysts are the contagious stage.
Trophozoites are in the parasitic stage.
Giardia Transmission
As mentioned, trophozoites and cysts may be passed in fresh feces, but only the hardshelled little cysts can withstand the conditions of the outside world. The cysts live in the
environment (outside the host's body) potentially for months until they are consumed by a
host. Inside the host, the cyst's shell is digested away, releasing two trophozoites into the
intestine, and the cycle begins again. Contaminated water is the classical source of a
Giardia infection.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952529&ind=183&objTypeID=1007 1/4
When a fecal sample is analyzed, the appearance of the Giardia organism depends on
whether the sample is freshly obtained or if it has been outside of the host's body for a
while. Giardia organisms begin to round up into cysts in a matter of hours. The active
trophozoites rather look like funny faces with the two nuclei forming the eyes and median
bodies forming the mouth. Cysts look a bit more generic.
In the environment, cysts survive in water and soil as long as it is relatively cool and wet. A
host animal will accidentally swallow a cyst when drinking from a puddle, or toilet, or when
licking fur. After the cyst has been swallowed, the cyst's shell is digested away, freeing the
two trophozoites that go forth and attach to the intestinal lining.
As mentioned, the trophozoite will swim to a spot using its flagella and attach with its
suction cup (more correctly called its "ventral disc"). Trophozoites tend to live in different
intestinal areas in different host species but will move to other areas depending on the diet
the host is eating. The trophozoite may round itself up and form a cyst while still inside the
host's body. If the host has diarrhea, both trophozoites and cysts may be shed in diarrhea;
either form can be found in fresh stool.
After infection, it takes 5 to 12 days in dogs or 5 to 16 days in cats for Giardia to be found
in the host’s stool. Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia. Infection is more
common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
How Does Giardia Cause Diarrhea?
Infection seems to cause problems with normal intestinal absorption of vitamins and other
nutrients. Diarrhea is generally not bloody with a Giardia infection. Immune-suppressive
medications, such as corticosteroids, can re-activate an old Giardia infection. We do not
know why some infected hosts get diarrhea while others never do.
Diagnosis
In the past, diagnosis was difficult. The stool sample being examined needed to be fresh,
plus Giardia rarely showed up on the usual fecal testing methods used to detect other
parasites. Several tricks have been developed to make Giardia easier to find
(special stains, using special processing solutions, etc.), but what has made the biggest
difference in the diagnosis of Giardia is the ELISA test kit, which is similar in format to a
home pregnancy test. This method has dramatically improved the ability to
detect Giardia infections and the test can be completed in just a few minutes while you
wait.
Giardia shed organisms intermittently and may be difficult to detect. Sometimes pets must
be retested in order to find an infection, and asymptomatic carrier animals are common. It
should also be mentioned that the ELISA test can remain positive for some time after the
infection has been eradicated so if re-testing is desired after a positive test, another test
format may be more helpful than the ELISA test kit.
Treatment
A broad-spectrum dewormer called
fenbendazole (Panacur®) seems to be the
most reliable treatment at this time.
Metronidazole (Flagyl®) has been a classical
treatment for Giardia but studies show it to
only be effective in 67% of cases. For some
resistant cases, both medications are used
concurrently. Febantel is also commonly
used for Giardia as it is converted to
fenbendazole in the body.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952529&ind=183&objTypeID=1007 2/4
This photo shows the upper surface of a Giardia
protozoan isolated from a rat’s intestine. Photo by Dr.
Stan Erlandsen and Dr. Dennis Feely, Courtesy of the
CDC.
Because cysts can stick to the fur of the
infected patient and be a source for reinfection, the positive animal should receive
a bath at least once in the course of
treatment. At the least, the patient should
have a bath at the end of treatment, plus it is especially important to promptly remove
infected fecal matter to minimize environmental contamination.
Can Humans Be Infected?
The short answer is only rarely, so the concern is pretty low in general. However, maintain
good hygiene practices such as regular hand-washing and removing fresh pet fecal matter
promptly, as mentioned.
That said, here is a more detailed answer: Giardia duodenalis is classified into several
subcategories called assemblages and designated A through G. Some assemblages are
specific as to which host animals they can infect, and other assemblages are not so picky.
Assemblage F, for example, only infects cats, and assemblages C and D only infect dogs
but assemblage A will infect dogs, cats, people, rodents, wild mammals, and cattle.
Common testing methods do not indicate what assemblage has been detected, so there is
always a possibility of human transmission if the assemblage is unknown.
Environmental Decontamination
Giardia cysts are killed in the environment by freezing temperatures and by direct sunlight.
If neither of these is practical for the area to be disinfected, a chemical disinfectant will be
needed. Organic matter such as dirt or stool is protective of the cyst, so on a concrete
surface, do basic cleaning before disinfecting. Quaternary ammonia compounds can be
used to kill Giardia cysts.
Animals should be thoroughly bathed before being reintroduced into a clean area. A
properly chlorinated swimming pool should not be able to become contaminated. As for
areas with lawns or plants, decontamination will not be possible without killing the plants
and allowing the area to dry out in direct sunlight.
A Footnote on Vaccination
A vaccine against Giardia was previously available, not to prevent infection in a
vaccinated pet but to reduce the shedding of cysts by the vaccinated patient. In other
words, the vaccine was designed to reduce the contamination of a kennel where Giardia
was expected to be a problem. This would be helpful during an outbreak in a shelter or
rescue situation but is not particularly helpful to the average dog owner who wants to
simply prevent infection. Because of the limited usefulness of the vaccine, manufacturing
was discontinued in 2009.
In Summary:
Giardia is a parasite that sticks to its host's small intestine to feed.
It has two forms: one that lives in the environment (cyst) and one that lives
in the host (trophozoite).
Cysts are the contagious stage, and trophozoites are in the parasitic stage.
Transmission is by the fecal-oral route from infected stool
or contaminated water.
After infection, it takes 5 to 12 days for dogs or 5 to 16 days for cats for
Giardia to be found in the stool.
Infection is more common in kennels or shelters where animals are housed
in groups.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952529&ind=183&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Giardia causes diarrhea ranging from minor to severe. Veterinarians don't
know why some infected hosts get diarrhea while others never do.
Giardia rarely transmits from a pet to a human or vice versa.
Diagnosis requires a fresh fecal sample. Several tests may be needed as
false negatives can occur.
Treatment includes dewormers and metronidazole (antibiotic).
A low-residue, highly digestible diet may be beneficial until stools are firm.
Because infective cysts can stick to fur, patients should be bathed
frequently during and at the end of treatment.
The environment has to be cleaned after every case because it is so
contagious. Giardia can be killed with common disinfectants. Quaternary
ammonia compounds are the most effective.
Giardia cysts are killed in the environment by freezing temperatures and by
direct sunlight.
To kill Giardia on a concrete surface, do basic cleaning before disinfecting.
Lawns and plants cannot be decontaminated without killing the plants and
allowing them to dry out in direct sunlight.
No vaccine is available.
Additional information from the Companion Animal Parasite Counsel (CAPC):
DrontalPlus® is effective in treating Giardia in dogs when administered per label
directions.
CAPC Board majority opinion is that asymptomatic dogs may not require treatment.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952529&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157141
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952529&ind=183&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 19, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
What is Helicobacter?
Helicobacter is a genus of spiral bacteria that, amazingly, is able to survive the severe
acidity of the stomach. The existence of such bacteria has been known of since 1889, but
it wasn't until nearly 100 years later that their significance was realized.
Until the 1980s, stomach ulcers were treated with an assortment of antacids with the idea
that excess acid had caused the ulcer. It turned out that most stomach ulcers of humans
weren't from excess stomach acid but were from Helicobacter infection instead. Treatment
is aimed at both reducing stomach acid and killing Helicobacter.
Currently, this ulcerative infection is treated with medications that reduce stomach acid
secretion combined with antibiotics specifically directed against Helicobacter.
The relationship between Helicobacter and stomach ulceration is not simple. Stress plays
a part as does concurrent disease. Most dogs and cats harbor Helicobacter in their
stomachs and never get sick as a result but in the right circumstances, a Helicobacter
infection can complicate other intestinal disease.
How Does Helicobacter Cause Damage?
Very few organisms can withstand the extreme acidity of the stomach. The tissue of the
stomach is protected by a layer of mucus into which bicarbonate is secreted as an acid
neutralizer. The integrity of this mucus lining keeps us from being burned by our own
stomach acid.
Helicobacter survives by using enzymes to create its own layer of protective bicarbonate.
This little safety suit allows the bacteria to actually burrow into the stomach without regard
for the extreme acid surrounding it. The presence of Helicobacter generates inflammation
in the stomach tissue.
Many patients are colonized by Helicobacter and do not develop symptoms; however, if
Helicobacter penetrates deeply enough, it will bind to the mucus-secreting cells of the
stomach and disrupt their ability to produce normal mucus. Ultimately, the stomach's
mucus lining is disrupted, acid gains access to the stomach tissue, and burning results.
Ulcers are thus formed. Making matters worse, Helicobacter organisms are able to
stimulate extra acid secretion by the stomach tissue. More burning and more ulcers result,
and soon the patient is experiencing pain, nausea, and/or vomiting. It is unclear what
constitutes a few Helicobacter bacteria sharing the stomach with its host peacefully and
numerous Helicobacter organisms disrupting the stomach lining integrity and causing
disease. It is possible that without additional stomach disease (such as inflammatory bowel
disease) or other factors (stress, anxiety), Helicobacter causes no trouble. there are many
strains and types of Helicobacter, and not all of them cause harm. Helicobacter organisms
are often found in small numbers in normal stomachs.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951472&ind=184&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Helicobacter On Cytology
Impression smears from gastric endoscopic biopsy. Photo
Courtesy Dr. Adam Honeckman.
Some Helicobacter species are also capable of producing toxins, but the role of such
toxins in this disease process is not clear.
Helicobacter seems to be one reason why an animal that has been stable with
inflammatory bowel disease or some other stomach disease might suddenly get much
worse.
It is unclear what constitutes a few Helicobacter bacteria sharing the stomach with its host
peacefully versus numerous Helicobacter organisms disrupting the stomach lining integrity
and causing disease. It is possible that without additional stomach disease (such
as inflammatory bowel disease) or other factors (stress, anxiety), Helicobacter causes no
trouble. Complicating the picture is the fact that there are many strains and types
of Helicobacter and not all of them cause harm. Helicobacter organisms are often found in
small numbers in normal stomachs.
Does Helicobacter Infection Cause Cancer?
In humans, it appears that Helicobacter infection may indeed cause cancer. In people,
Helicobacter infection represents a 400% risk increase for the development of stomach
cancer. Pets, however, get infected with different Helicobacter species, and the same
association with cancer in these species has not been made.
Does My Pet Have Helicobacter Overgrowth?
There are many excellent ways to determine if a pet's chronic gastrointestinal problem is
complicated by Helicobacter infection.
Biopsy
While it is possible to miss Helicobacter if only certain areas of the stomach are colonized,
a biopsy is by far the most accurate test. This method not only detects the infection but
also assesses the degree of inflammation and checks for cancer.
The Rapid Urease Test
Some gastroenterologists will keep a
special broth handy during the biopsy
procedure. A spare tissue sample can be
dropped in the broth and incubated for an
hour. The presence of urease, the enzyme
that creates Helicobacter's protective
bicarbonate layer, induces a color change
in the solution. In this way, Helicobacter
can be detected in an hour rather than
after the several-day periods it takes to
obtain biopsy results.
PCR Testing
This especially sensitive DNA testing can
be used but is only available in a few
centers.
Blood Tests
Antibodies against Helicobacter can be detected, but their levels take months to decline
even after the Helicobacter organism is long gone, limiting the usefulness of such testing.
Breath Testing
A radioisotope-labeled meal is fed, and the patient's breath is tested for Helicobacter
metabolites. This form of testing is easy to use for monitoring the eradication of
Helicobacter, plus it is non-invasive. In humans, Helicobacter eradication is usually
confirmed four to eight weeks after treatment has been completed. With the breath test, a
second biopsy or endoscopy is not needed. Unfortunately, this type of testing is not readily
available for pets.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951472&ind=184&objTypeID=1007 2/3
What is the Treatment?
Treatment protocols generally consist of two or three antibiotics and a medication to
reduce stomach acid production. Numerous medication combinations have been used.
Treatment typically involves two to three weeks of medication use.
Here is a list of medications typically used in the treatment of Helicobacter:
Amoxicillin (an antibiotic)
Tetracycline (an antibiotic)
Pepto-Bismol (the bismuth actually accumulates
in the Helicobacter cell wall and destroys the cell)
Flagyl (an antibiotic)
Omeprazole (an antacid)
Pepcid AC (an antacid)
Clarithromycin (an antibiotic)
Azithromycin (an antibiotic)
Erythromycin (an antibiotic)
Can My Pet Infect Me?
Currently, this is not known. At least one known Helicobacter species is capable of
infecting both humans and cats. Cat ownership does not seem to represent an increased
risk for Helicobacter infection in humans. Transmission of the disease is felt to be through
contact with vomit or fecal matter. When cleaning up after your pet, wear gloves if possible,
and certainly wash your hands thoroughly afterward.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951472&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157170
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:22 PM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951472&ind=184&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: May 03, 2021
Hepatic encephalopathy is a neurological condition that can occur in pets, more
commonly in dogs, that already have liver disease. Neurological conditions affect the
nervous system, which includes the brain, nerves, and spinal cord. The condition is
potentially life threatening.
The liver normally filters out certain substances that are toxic to the body’s nervous
system, such as ammonia. When the liver isn’t working properly, it can lead to a buildup of
these substances in the blood stream. The most common liver disease that causes
hepatic encephalopathy is a portosystemic shunt, a condition in which certain blood
vessels bypass the liver’s filtration system. Hepatic lipidosis, a build-up of fat within liver
cells, is another common cause of hepatic encephalopathy, especially among cats.
Signs
Signs of hepatic encephalopathy include unusual behavior, trouble or wobbliness when
walking, seizures, drooling, vocalizing (i.e. whimpering, whining, crying, and other unusual
noises), blindness, weakness, and/or coma. Signs of liver disease may also be noted,
which include poor appetite, weight loss, yellow skin, gums, and eyes, enlarged belly,
drinking and urinating often, throwing up, and/or loose stool. Any or all of these signs may
be worse after eating. That is because the gastrointestinal (GI) tract is one of the main
organs from which ammonia is filtered, so eating potentially causes an influx of this toxin
into the blood stream.
Diagnosis
To diagnose the condition, your veterinarian will give the pet a physical examination
looking for signs of neurologic or liver disease. Bloodwork will assess the body’s immune
system and check for evidence of inflammation or infection (e.g. complete blood
count/CBC) and determine how well the major organ systems are working (e.g. serum
biochemistry profile). Common findings with liver disease include anemia, low red blood
cell percentage; elevated liver enzymes e.g. ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and bilirubin; and
decreased blood glucose. Sometimes with liver disease, pets are at increased risk for
bleeding. Coagulation tests, which can determine how well the blood is clotting, may be
run if bleeding tendencies are suspected.
Bile acid tests and ammonia measurements, also known as ammonia tolerance tests, can
help confirm liver disease and hepatic encephalopathy, especially when combined with
signs and laboratory findings. Occasionally, such tests do not provide a full diagnosis.
Additional tests may be needed to figure out what caused the liver disease, such as Xrays and an abdominal ultrasound. Treatment may be started before all tests are finished if
most signs point to liver disease and hepatic encephalopathy. This speed allows
veterinarians to help the patient as quickly as possible and prevent the disease from
getting worse.
Treatment

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10223462&ind=185&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Hepatic encephalopathy can be life-threatening, so treating symptoms quickly is
important. Hospitalization may be required. In some cases, brain swelling can occur,
which is treated with intravenous (IV) medications. Patients with brain swelling need to be
monitored very closely. Many such patients are admitted to veterinary ER hospitals for
round-the-clock care. Seizures are treated with anti-epileptic medications such as
diazepam, levetiracetam, or phenobarbital.
Additional medications may include antibiotics and/or certain types of enemas to minimize
ammonia-producing bacteria; lactulose, which helps prevent ammonia from being
absorbed from the GI tract; and/or liver protective medications, such as SAM-e or
Denamarin®, which combines silymarin with SAMe. Other treatments will depend on the
symptoms and bloodwork of the pet, such as IV fluids, therapy for bleeding, etc.
In some cases, feeding a lower protein diet may be helpful to minimize the volume of
ammonia produced in the GI tract, but this is not always needed and will depend on the
veterinarian’s recommendations. Once the cause of liver disease is determined, treating it
will help stop hepatic encephalopathy from worsening or returning after treatment. Such
treatments will depend on the type and cause of liver disease.
Will My Pet Recover?
If signs are mild and treated quickly, most pets recover. Treating the liver disease is
important to prevent hepatic encephalopathy from recurring, although this is not always
possible. Unfortunately, severely affected pets can die, even with treatment. This is why it
is important to seek treatment as soon as you notice your pet is showing unusual
symptoms. Call your veterinarian for an appointment as soon as possible if you think your
pet is experiencing liver disease or hepatic encephalopathy.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10223462&pid=19239
0c2b2f5e-e4f4-477f-b6d4-60b003442c60.1754157238
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatic Encephalopathy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=10223462&ind=185&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Hepatitis in Dogs
Stephanie Cruz-Rincon, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Revised: August 24, 2022
Published: August 05, 2020
What is Hepatitis?
Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. It is a
syndrome - a group of clinical signs or
symptoms - rather than a specific disease,
and it has many causes. Your dog can have
immediate inflammation in their liver called
acute hepatitis or long-term inflammation
called chronic hepatitis. Chronic hepatitis
(CH), also called chronic active hepatitis,
can lead to scar tissue formation and
cirrhosis in the liver. Cirrhosis is extensive,
end-stage scar tissue. Some dogs with acute
hepatitis progress to the chronic form.
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
One disease that causes chronic hepatitis is infectious canine hepatitis (ICH). ICH is
caused by a virus but not the same as the Hepatitis A, B or C viruses that cause disease
in humans; you and your family won’t get sick if your dog is infected. Similarly, The
hepatitis viruses that cause human hepatitis do not affect dogs. ICH is spread through
animal feces, urine, saliva and objects. Since most dogs are vaccinated as puppies
against ICH, it is considered a rare infection. If you have a young puppy or an
unvaccinated dog in your household, they can get ill with this virus. However,
outbreaks sometimes occur, mostly in dogs less than 1-year-old or unvaccinated dogs. An
infected dog may show signs of depression, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Treatment involves supportive care such as fluids and medications to boost liver function;
the latter may include SAMe, milk thistle, ursodiol, and vitamin E.
Causes
Aside from ICH, there are many other causes of hepatitis. Causes of acute hepatitis
include toxins, drugs, viruses, bacteria (particularly leptospirosis), and fungi. On the other
hand, chronic hepatitis is caused by bacteria, viruses, excess copper in the liver, drugs,
and immune system issues. If a cause cannot be determined, this is referred to as
idiopathic hepatitis and is the most common cause. Idiopathic means no cause can be
found.
Age and Breed Predispositions
Any dog can have an acute episode of hepatitis. Chronic hepatitis, on the other hand, is
most common in middle-aged to older dogs; most dogs diagnosed with chronic hepatitis
are 4-10 years old.

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9758237&ind=186&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Some breeds are suspected to have a genetic predisposition to CH, making them more
likely to develop it. These include the Bedlington Terrier, Doberman pinscher, West
Highland white terrier, Dalmatian, English springer spaniel, American and English cocker
spaniels, Jack Russell terrier, and standard poodle, Great Dane, Labrador retriever, and
others. CH is also more common in females than males.
Signs
Dogs with acute hepatitis often have more severe signs than those with CH. Symptoms
may include anorexia (lack of appetite), vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, depression, fever,
and jaundice (yellow discoloration of the eyes, gums, and skin), enlarged abdomen and
weight loss. How serious your dog’s symptoms depend on how much liver damage they
have and this may vary from mild to severe. In severe cases, there are signs of bleeding
and bruising. Bleeding can occur inside the body or through any opening of the body, such
as the nose and mouth.
Dogs with chronic hepatitis often appear normal early on. It is often surprising how normal
the dog appears, even with significant progressing disease. This is why it is a good idea to
pay attention to elevations in the liver enzymes (particularly ALT), as there is a better
chance of slowing down the disease the sooner it is detected and appropriate
management begins. As the disease gets worse, common signs are poor appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea, depression, increased thirst and urination, weakness, jaundice, and
weight loss. A small number of dogs have severe signs such as bleeding, incoordination,
and behavior changes. Similar to acute hepatitis, bleeding can occur through any opening
in the body.
Diagnosis
Similar to many illnesses, a thorough history and physical examination from your
veterinarian are crucial to making a diagnosis. Drug history and potential exposure to
toxins are particularly important as these can cause significant liver damage. Some dogs
with hepatitis have increased levels of liver enzymes that can be seen on lab work. These
increases do not have to be large to be important; they may indicate liver damage but can
also be caused by many different diseases.
Elevated liver values are a common abnormality, but they are often non-specific and can
be confusing to pet owners. Not all cases of elevated liver enzymes indicate specific liver
disease. The liver performs many functions and, in some cases, the liver enzymes may
elevate due to problems elsewhere in the body, or simply due to age. It is a good idea to
look into these sooner rather than later, especially if your dog is one of the breeds
predisposed to hepatitis. They may be the only abnormality a dog with chronic hepatitis
has at that time.
To add to the confusion, some dogs with hepatitis can have normal liver enzymes. This
normalcy does not rule out chronic hepatitis: CH can be so severe in some dogs that there
is little functioning liver tissue left to release enzymes, making test results look ‘normal.' If
hepatitis is suspected, your veterinarian may recommend a serum bile acids test
specifically to evaluate liver function. Another diagnostic test is an abdominal ultrasound.
Abnormalities on these tests may strongly suggest hepatitis, but often do not pinpoint a
cause. A liver biopsy is the most accurate way to make a diagnosis.
Treatment
Treating a dog with acute hepatitis involves supportive therapy such as fluids, medications
and antioxidants.
Treating chronic hepatitis has several goals: treat the underlying cause, reduce
inflammation and scarring/cirrhosis, provide supportive care, and treat complications. This
support may involve changing current medications, use of antibiotics, and medication

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9758237&ind=186&objTypeID=1007 2/3
meant to reduce excess copper. Steroids, and/or other immunosuppressive drugs, may be
used to reduce inflammation if infection is not suspected. Supportive care works to boost
liver function, while treating complications depends on the specific problems.
Your dog may benefit from specific dietary changes depending on their individual condition
and the cause of their chronic hepatitis. Dogs whose chronic hepatitis is associated with
excess copper in the liver should be fed diets reduced in copper. They can also have a
zinc gluconate supplement added to their food which acts to reduce copper levels as well.
Regardless of cause, dogs with chronic hepatitis may benefit from diets with restricted
protein levels. Restricted protein diets are not always necessary however and are only
considered if your dog has evidence of protein intolerance. Your veterinarian will work with
you to determine if your dog needs to be on a protein restricted diet. Another important
dietary factor to consider for a dog with CH is how tasty and nutritious the food is. Dogs
with CH often do not want to or are reluctant to eat. It's important your pet's food is
appetizing to them and has high levels of carbohydrates and moderate levels of fat to
provide them with their necessary calories. There is evidence that fiber may benefit dogs
with liver disease and is another factor to consider increasing in your dog's diet.
Prognosis
Your pet’s prognosis depends on the underlying cause of their hepatitis. In general, acute
hepatitis has a better prognosis than the chronic form. If the liver is not too damaged,
most dogs recover. Some, however, progress to chronic hepatitis.
According to one study, the average survival time with chronic hepatitis was two to three
years, although individual results depend on the condition and response to treatment.
Identification of the liver disease (via biopsies) is the best way to ensure the proper
treatment. The prognosis is much worse if scarring and/or cirrhosis is extensive or blood
clotting test results are abnormal. To ensure the health of your pet, it is important to not
only treat hepatitis as soon as it is diagnosed, but also to look into abnormal test results
such as elevated liver enzymes; these may be early signs of liver issues.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9758237&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157265
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9758237&ind=186&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo by Karen James
Hepatozoonosis in Dogs
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: November 20, 2019
Hepatozoonosis is a parasitic infection of dogs
primarily caused by either Hepatozoon canis or
Hepatozoon americanum. The illness is difficult to
treat and can be fatal in dogs showing symptoms.
Both forms are transmitted from ticks and are
debilitating. Without treatment, chronic wasting
begins in either form, which usually ends with
death within 12 months.
Species of Hepatozoon are protozoans, which are
a different kind of infectious organism than
bacteria or viruses. Like ameba, protozoans are
single-celled parasites that live in the
environment. Although both species cause
hepatozoonosis, the disease and recommended
treatment are different.
People cannot be infected by these protozoa.
Transmission and Infection
Ticks get infected by feeding from a host, and then transmit Hepatozoon protozoans to
dogs when the dog ingests them. This is not a disease in which ticks biting the dog make
it sick. The tick becomes infected with protozoans after it has a blood meal from an
infected animal. This can occur by eating birds or rodents with infected ticks attached, or
eating a tick on themselves. Infection does not occur because of a tick bite, and dogs are
not infectious to each other.
Hepatozoon protozoans develop to a certain life stage in the tick to allow for infection of
another animal. Dogs must eat the infected tick in order to become infected.
Concurrent infection, debilitating disease, immunosuppressant drugs, and young age
increase a dog’s chances of becoming infected and having symptoms.
Symptoms of Infection
H. canis and H. americanum have different symptoms, ticks, life cycles, and prevalence.
H. americanum comes from dogs eating Gulf Coast ticks, and the brown dog tick conveys
H. canis. Many dogs have mild symptoms, or none.
When a dog is infected with H. canis, the protozoans reproduce and develop primarily in
organs associated with blood storage (e.g. spleen) or the immune system (e.g. bone
marrow, lymph nodes). You may see your dog not wanting to move around, and he may
have fever, pale gums and skin, and enlarged lymph nodes. Many infected dogs do not
have symptoms. Disease tends to be less severe than with H. americanum. Young dogs
less than 18 months of age are most frequently affected by H. canis.

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatozoonosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9400204&ind=187&objTypeID=1007 1/2
H. americanum protozoans tend to be a far more severe disease that reproduces and
develops in muscles, including the heart. Cysts — thick, protective capsules — can form
around the organisms, resulting in life-long infections. A dog’s immune system tends to
respond more strongly to these protozoans compared to H. canis, leading to severe
reactions. The infection can result in symptoms such as pain in the muscle, bone, and/or
joints. Infected dogs may limp or be unable to walk, seem painful when touched, run a
fever, and lose weight.
Diagnosis
A veterinarian will need to examine the dog to note all the physical abnormalities. Blood
can be drawn to check immune cells, blood cells, and to make sure the internal organs
are working properly. X-rays may help determine the extent of damage and rule out other
diseases. Hepatozoonosis can sometimes be diagnosed by blood tests. Examining blood
under the microscope can also be helpful for diagnosis. In many cases, a biopsy needs to
be taken from infected muscle and examined by a pathologist to determine which
protozoan is responsible for the infection.
Treatment
Treatment is difficult in dogs showing symptoms. Sadly, many dogs cannot be cured.
Dogs infected with Hepatozoon organisms can be treated with medications that will
decrease the severity of the symptoms, but return of symptoms is common. It’s more
difficult to control symptoms in H. americanum than H. canis. Pain medications, blood
transfusions, and nutritional or fluid support such as intravenous fluids, syringe feeding,
and high calorie diets may be needed for dogs with severe symptoms.
Remember, treatment will not cure your dog, but can make him more comfortable and
give him a higher quality of life.
Prevention
No vaccines are available for hepatozoonosis. The best method for prevention is
aggressive, year round tick prevention, as well as keeping your dog from hunting and
eating wild rodents or birds (often easier said than done). Treat the yard for ticks if it does
not freeze in your climate. Remove ticks quickly from your dog to keep him from eating
them.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9400204&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157291
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:24 PM Hepatozoonosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9400204&ind=187&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 25, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
What is Inflammatory Bowel Disease?
The membranes and layers of the normal GI tract are delicate and highly
organized. There is a muscle layer responsible for the proper movement and mixing of
digestive enzymes/nutrients, plus there is a high-surface area lining responsible for
absorbing nutrients. Inflammatory bowel disease refers to the condition that results when
cells involved in inflammation and immune response are called into the delicate layers of
the GI tract. These cells disrupt both nutrient movement and absorption leading to weight
loss, diarrhea, vomiting, or any combination thereof.
Chronic vomiting results if the infiltration is in the stomach or higher areas of the small
intestine. Watery diarrhea with weight loss results if the infiltration is in the lower small
intestine. Mucous diarrhea with fresh blood (colitis) results if the infiltration occurs in the
large intestine. Of course, the entire tract from top to bottom may be involved. Many
people confuse inflammatory bowel disease with irritable bowel syndrome, a stressrelated diarrhea problem. Treatment for IBS is aimed at diet and stress management; IBS
is a completely different condition from IBD.
Why Does this Happen?
Infiltration of the bowel with inflammatory cells occurs when something inflammatory (or, in
other words, stimulating to the immune system) is ongoing within the intestinal tract. The
cause of this inflammation could be parasites, toxic materials produced by bacteria living
in the bowel, the actual bacteria themselves, or even digested food proteins. Many
experts believe that the fundamental problem is a defect in the barrier function of the
bowel such that the offending materials listed above gain entry to the bowel tissue in a
way that would not occur in normal bowel. The diagnosis of IBD presumes that a tangible
cause of inflammation has not been found despite extensive testing. You may hear the
phrase "diagnosis of exclusion" in relation to IBD. This means that all the tangible
diseases have been ruled out or excluded, so the answer must be IBD.
Why Would the Veterinarian Think My Pet Might Have IBD?
A little vomiting or diarrhea here and there seems to be pretty standard for pet dogs and
cats. After all, cats groom themselves and get hairballs. Dogs eat all sorts of ridiculous
things they aren’t supposed to. Still, many owners notice that their pets seem to have
vomiting or diarrhea a bit more often than it seems they should. It might be subtle where
you notice that you are cleaning up a hairball or vomit pile rather more frequently than with
previous pets or it could be the realization that you have not seen the pet have a normal
stool in weeks or months. Typically, the animal doesn’t seem obviously sick beyond GI
signs. Maybe there has been weight loss over time but nothing acute. There is simply a
chronic problem with vomiting, diarrhea, or both. Once it is clear that a smoldering
problem is occurring, a medical workup is appropriate. Chronic GI disease has many
causes so before the IBD conclusion can be drawn, many conditions must be explored
first.

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951476&ind=188&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Ultrasound
Photo by MarVistaVet
If vomiting occurs weekly or more, this is a reason to see the veterinarian for an
evaluation.
How is IBD Diagnosed?
Before we get to IBD, we need to get through the step-by-step testing sequence that
explores other causes of GI disease, because, as we said, to diagnose IBD the tangible
causes must be ruled out.
The first step in pursuing any chronic problem is a metabolic database. This means
running a basic blood panel and urinalysis to rule out biochemically widespread problems,
such as liver disease or kidney disease, pancreatitis, or hyperthyroidism in cats that could
be responsible for the signs. Since IBD is localized to the GI tract, such a database is
usually normal but might express a general inflammatory response in the blood or a loss
of blood proteins as often there is a leak of albumin, an important blood protein, from the
intestine into the bowel contents. The database not only serves to rule out metabolic
causes for the patient's symptoms but also assesses other areas, potentially turning up
unanticipated problems and identifying factors that could change what medications are
used.
Fecal testing and broad-spectrum deworming is often performed at this time to rule out
parasites as a cause of chronic inflammation. If the patient is young or has been housed
with multiple animals, more obscure parasites may be afoot, and often special fecal
testing can be sent to the laboratory for PCR testing. Typical organisms screened by this
kind of testing include Giardia, Cryptosporidium, Salmonella, Tritrichomonas, and
Clostridium perfringens.
In dogs, a condition called Addison's disease is able to create chronic waxing and waning
intestinal disease, among numerous other possible manifestations. This condition, more
correctly termed hypoadrenocorticism, is often referred to as "the Great Imitator" as it can
mimic many other diseases besides IBD. This condition revolves around a deficiency in
cortisol, a crucial hormone in adaptation to stress. Treatment is relatively straightforward
so it is important to screen for it. This is done with a screening test called baseline cortisol
blood level or with a longer test called an ACTH stimulation test, which is a more definitive
test that requires an hour or two in the hospital.
In both cats and dogs, a trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) test would be performed to
rule out pancreatic exocrine insufficiency, a deficiency of digestive enzymes. This
condition is relatively easy to treat but, like Addison's disease, cannot be diagnosed
without a specific test. Typically this test is run in combination with a vitamin B-12 level
and a folate level. When intestinal bacterial populations alter (we used to say "overgrow"
but that is not technically accurate), folate levels rise and B-12 levels drop. Antibiotics are
likely indicated in this situation as well as vitamin B-12 injections.
Somewhere in the course of this workup, an
ultrasound of the abdomen is generally
recommended. Ultrasound is able to image and
enable sampling of areas within the belly that cannot
be accessed by endoscopy. The texture of the liver
and pancreas are evaluated and the size of the
mesenteric lymph nodes, which serve the bowel, are
examined. The layering of the bowel is also evaluated
to see if it is thickened, as is more typical of IBD, or
more disrupted as with intestinal cancer such as
lymphoma. Since cancer is a consideration for most
adult animals with chronic intestinal disease, this kind
of imaging is particularly valuable and if any unusual
textures or even masses are discovered, they may be needle aspirated for analysis.

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951476&ind=188&objTypeID=1007 2/5
After all the Testing for Other Diseases
So, let's say we've come to the end of an extensive testing sequence with no conclusion.
At this point, we can probably feel comfortable making the diagnosis of inflammatory
bowel disease. What to do next is going to depend on our patient.
Treatment
The Stable Patient
If our patient has a normal cobalamin (vitamin B-12) level, is not losing significant weight,
has a normal appetite, normal blood protein levels, and good energy level, then we have
time to try some treatment approaches and see if one of them works.
There are three types of IBD: food-responsive, antibiotic-responsive, and steroidresponsive. They are generally explored in that order as long as the patient is stable
enough for the process.
Food Responsive IBD
Recent studies have shown that patients with normal albumin levels and without vitamin
B-12 deficiencies have a 50:50 chance of responding to diet alone (no drugs needed).
What sort of diet? The diets that have shown the most consistent success are the
hydrolyzed protein diets.
Hydrolyzed proteins are "predigested" to create protein segments that are too small to
stimulate the immune system. Further, they typically are made with medium-chain fatty
acids (easier to absorb than the more customary long-chain fats) and favorable omega 3
to omega 6 fatty acid ratios. Often special nutrients, called "prebiotics," are included to
promote a healthier bowel bacterial population. In other words, there is more to these
diets than just their predigested proteins. Another approach is the use of novel protein
diets. The idea here is that the patient cannot have an immunological reaction to a protein
source he or she has never experienced. (It takes a long time to be exposed to a protein
before the immune system will respond against it so a new protein should be safe). This
means using an unusual protein such as rabbit, venison, fish (for dogs), or duck (so long
as the patient has not been fed these foods before).
As mentioned, it takes about a month to expect a good response, but there should be at
least some response within the first 2 weeks of feeding the test diet. If a good response is
seen after the first couple of weeks, the diet should be continued for a full 12 weeks, and
after that, there is a fair chance that the patient can return to his or her original diet without
consequences.
If there has been no substantial improvement, the next step will be an antibiotic trial.
Antibiotic-Responsive IBD
Antibiotics can solve the IBD problem for a number of patients. If the diet has not brought
meaningful improvement, a two-week trial of either metronidazole or tylosin would be a
good next step. If the patient shows good improvement within this two-week period, the
treatment is continued for a total of 4 weeks. If the symptoms recur when the medication
course is completed, the patient may need indefinite treatment. Metronidazole has some
issues with side effects when used long-term but tylosin is used widely in this way and
many animals cannot live a normal life without it.
If there has been no meaningful response after 2 weeks of antibiotics and no meaningful
response to diet, then suppression of the immune system is probably going to be needed.
Steroid-Responsive IBD
The cornerstone of treatment for inflammatory bowel disease is the suppression of
inflammation. When diet and antibiotics have not provided results, a trial course of
corticosteroids (such as prednisolone or dexamethasone) is needed. IBD most commonly

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951476&ind=188&objTypeID=1007 3/5
involves lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell, part of the immune system) that infiltrate
the delicate bowel tissues, and corticosteroids will suppress these lymphocytes and
hopefully restore the bowel’s function. Corticosteroids should work on inflammatory bowel
disease in any area of the intestinal tract. A month of this type of medication would be the
next trial. If results are still underwhelming, then stronger immune suppression (as with
cyclosporine or chlorambucil) is needed.
Appropriate periodic monitoring tests should be done alongside long-term use of immune
suppression.
In cases where it is particularly important to spare the patients from the side effects of
long-term steroids a medication called budesonide can be used. This medication is not
readily absorbed from the GI tract and serves as a topical treatment for the lining of the
intestine.
The protocol described above where all three forms of IBD are explored could easily
take 2 months or longer to run through. If the patient is not comfortable enough for
this kind of treatment testing, it may be better to seek an intestinal biopsy right off the
bat.
The Unstable Patient
If our patient is not feeling well, is losing significant weight, has a poor appetite, has
vitamin B-12 deficiency, or has low blood protein levels, then we need to confirm IBD with
a biopsy and look for complicating additional conditions. Biopsy samples are obtained
either by surgery or by endoscopy.
Surgery
Surgery involves actually opening the patient's abdomen and harvesting samples from
different areas of the intestine and stomach. Other organs can be visualized and sampled
as well. Obviously, this is an invasive procedure, and the patient may not be in the best
condition to go through it. On the other hand, it is something most veterinary hospitals can
perform without referral to a specialty center, and specialized equipment is not necessary.
Endoscopy
Alternatively, endoscopy involves the use of a skinny tubular instrument (an endoscope)
that has a tiny fiber optic or video camera at the end. The endoscope is inserted down the
throat, into the stomach, and into the small intestine, and small pinches of tissue are
obtained via tiny biting forceps. If the large intestine is to be viewed, a series of enemas is
needed before the procedure as well as a relatively long fast. The endoscope is inserted
rectally and again tissue samples are harvested. The advantage of this procedure over
surgery is that it is not as invasive as surgery. Patients typically go home the same day.
Disadvantages are expense (often referral to a specialist is necessary) and the fact that
the rest of the abdomen cannot be viewed. Growths that are seen via endoscopy cannot
be removed at that time and a second procedure typically must be planned whereas, if
surgical exploration is used to obtain the biopsy, any growths can also be excised at that
time.
Is it at all Reasonable to just Try Treatment and Skip the Expensive Biopsy?
Possibly.
As mentioned, the stable comfortable patient has time to try different treatments. In cats,
where intestinal lymphoma is common, there is a great deal of overlap in treatment
between IBD and intestinal lymphoma. Both conditions are called infiltrative bowel
diseases and it can be hard to distinguish them. Many people choose a protocol to cover
both conditions.

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951476&ind=188&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Junior
DeLunior
Photo by MarVistaVet
Certainly, with IBD the diagnostic tests tend to be much more costly than the treatment.
The problem is making sure there is enough confidence in the diagnosis of IBD that there
will be no harm in skipping diagnostics. It is not unusual to take the work-up all the way
through ultrasound and decide on treatment based on the information gained up to that
point.
If immunosuppressive drugs are used, it may be difficult to go back
later and attempt a biopsy as the true diagnosis may become
obscured by prior treatment.
IBD continues to be a common cause of chronic intestinal distress in
both humans and animals. Research for less invasive tests and for
newer treatments is ongoing.
This article is dedicated to Junior DeLunior, my cat from 1984-2003,
who had colitis due to inflammatory bowel disease and Helicobacter
overgrowth. Assist-fed for three years.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951476&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157316
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Inflammatory Bowel Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951476&ind=188&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Intestinal Lymphangiectasia (Protein-losing Enteropathy)
in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 14, 2021
Published: February 11, 2003
What is a Protein-Losing Enteropathy?
If the intestine is leaking nutrients out
instead of absorbing them in, clearly
the result is a nutritional disaster. In
protein-losing enteropathy, that is
exactly what is happening: the
intestine and/or stomach is actually
leaking out protein. This is obviously
a serious problem as without protein
coming in, the body's only choice for
making the proteins it needs is
breaking down existing proteins and
reassembling their amino acids into
new proteins. Muscle is broken down
to make way for higher priority blood
proteins. The immune system's ability
to make antibody proteins may be compromised. Debilitation results from protein breakdown and the intestinal disease that started it all facilitates this by creating diarrhea.
Lymphangiectasia is one of several protein-losing enteropathies.
Albumin Loss in Protein-Losing Enteropathy
The main protein that one cannot afford to lose is called albumin. This protein normally is
produced by the liver and it circulates in the bloodstream acting as a carrier for
biochemicals that require transport but cannot actually dissolve in blood by themselves.
Albumin can be considered sort of a mass transit system in the bloodstream, a bus or
subway, if you will, carrying important biochemicals from one place to another.
Albumin, by being the most prevalent blood protein, is also responsible (by virtue of the
complicated concept of oncotic pressure) for actually keeping fluid in the bloodstream.
When fluid cannot be held within the vasculature, it leaks out into body cavities (effusion)
or into tissue in general as edema (swelling).
Of course, in a protein-losing enteropathy other proteins are lost, too. Antibodies, proteins
of blood clotting, enzymes, etc. all leak out the intestine and are forever lost in the feces
that exits the body.
The body tries hard to maintain its albumin level by extracting protein from other sources
(like muscle), and having the liver make albumin from the components of these other
proteins. This may help maintain a workable amount of albumin in the bloodstream but it
comes at the expense of muscle tissue and other working proteins.
There are several described causes of protein-losing enteropathy:

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Intestinal Lymphangiectasia (Protein-losing Enteropathy) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951862&ind=189&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Inflammatory bowel disease
Histoplasmosis (a fungal infection)
Diseases associated with intestinal bleeding (parvovirus, intestinal parasites,
cancers such as lymphoma)
Breed associated PLE (as in soft-coated wheaten terrier, shar pei, Maltese, and
basenji)
Crypt disease (where the intestinal crypts dilate and plug with mucus)
Intestinal lymphangiectasia
We will limit our discussion to lymphangiectasia.
What is Intestinal Lymphangiectasia?
Lymph is a fluid that circulates through the body similar to the way blood does; however,
the heart actively pumps blood through the body while lymph is pumped passively via the
normal muscle activity of the body. Lymph consists of cells called lymphocytes. They are
cells of the immune system as well as the fluid that collects from the tissues and shunts
into lymphatic vessels, which are similar to veins.
The word lymphangiectasia means dilated lymph vessels. In the intestinal tract,
lymphangiectasia is usually caused by some kind of inflammation that puts pressure back
on the lymph vessels, leading them to dilate. Lymph flow may be blocked by the
inflammatory events in the intestine or local structures.
Lacteals are a specific type of lymph vessels in the intestinal tract designed to absorb
nutritional fats. The intestine is able to absorb our nutrients through small finger-like
structures called microvilli. Lacteals run though the center of the microvilli happily imbibing
fats from the food we have eaten. When there is high pressure within the lymph vessels,
the tender lacteals burst and instead of absorbing fats, the lymph inside them, including
cells, fats, and precious proteins are lost into the intestinal tract. The intestine may be able
to reabsorb some of these valuable substances at other sites but if the inflammatory
intestinal disease that started the problem in the first place is widespread, the balance
may have shifted to nutritional loss rather than gain.
Small terrier breeds, particularly the Yorkshire terrier, appear predisposed to the
development of lymphangiectasia. Lymphangiectasia is extremely rare in cats.
What Does One See at Home?
Weight loss is the most consistent sign along with chronic diarrhea, vomiting, and, in more
advanced cases, fluid accumulation in the abdomen creating a bloated appearance.
How do we Make a Diagnosis?
In most cases, an obviously sick, skinny dog is brought to the veterinarian. Sometimes the
above classical signs are seen but sometimes there is no specific hint of this condition
until blood test results are in.
Low Lymphocyte Count
Animals with lymphangiectasia have lymphocytes rolling out their lacteals and into their
intestine to be lost forever. The low blood lymphocyte count is so consistent with
lymphangiectasia that it is difficult to make this diagnosis if this finding is not present.
Low Cholesterol
Cholesterol is part of the lymph fluid that gets lost.
Low Albumin Level
Low blood albumin level is the most consistent finding in lymphangiectasia, though it is
possible to have lymphangiectasia in only a small portion of the intestine and still maintain

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Intestinal Lymphangiectasia (Protein-losing Enteropathy) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951862&ind=189&objTypeID=1007 2/4
a normal albumin level. There are a limited number of conditions that can lead to a low
albumin level: a protein-losing enteropathy; a protein-losing nephropathy where the
albumin is lost via leaking kidney membranes; reduced albumin production by a diseased
liver; hypoadrenocorticism, a deficiency in cortisone; or serum leakage through extreme
skin damage such as third-degree burns.
These conditions can be easily ruled out one by one. It is obvious if there are third-degree
burns. If there are none, a routine urinalysis will indicate if there is significant protein loss
in the urine and if glomerular disease should be pursued. A liver function test such as a
bile acids test will indicate whether or not there is latent liver failure. Blood testing can be
easily done to rule out hypoadrenocorticism (also called Addison's disease). If there aren't
any of these conditions, then there must be a protein-losing enteropathy by exclusion.
Biopsy will be needed to determine the nature of the intestinal disease causing the
protein-losing enteropathy.
Biopsy
Tissue sampling is necessary to distinguish the intestinal diseases that cause proteinlosing enteropathy.
With most PLE patients being deficient in albumin, this means they are not in a good
position to heal from a surgical biopsy so endoscopy is generally recommended as it is
less invasive. With endoscopy, a small camera on a long flexible scope travels down the
mouth, through the stomach and into the intestine (or up the anus past the large intestine
and into the lower small intestine) where biopsy samples can be pinched off with a
grabber. The procedure requires general anesthesia but is otherwise low risk and most
patients can go home the same day. Often the areas of intestinal disease are patchy and
surrounded by large areas of normal intestine so it is important to biopsy the right area.
Ultrasound of the abdomen prior to endoscopy is helpful in determining where to sample,
plus often a few spoons of corn oil or other fat are often fed a few hours prior to biopsy so
that dilated lacteals with plump and leaking fat visibly in the best areas for biopsy.
Because PLE patients often lose important vitamins and blood clotting factors, blood
clotting tests are generally done just prior to endoscopy.
Treatment
The first step in treatment is to address the underlying cause. In many cases of
lymphangiectasia, there is an association with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). Whether
or not the IBD is actually causing the lymphangiectasia remains a matter of speculation
but anti-inflammatories are often used aggressively in lymphangiectasia patients.
Prednisolone has been the traditional immune suppressive medication in this situation but
as it causes an increase in water consumption that can contribute to edema, other
medications - particularly cyclosporine - have become more popular as it does not have
steroid side effects.
Intestinal loss of a body protein called anti-thrombin III tends to form abnormal blood clots
that can lodge in inappropriate places (embolization). As prevention, anti-clotting
medications are often used. Aspirin has been traditional but clopidogrel is gaining
popularity. Approximately 10% of dogs with a protein-losing enteropathy will experience
clotting abnormalities if prevention is not begun.
Nutritional management of PLE is a bit tricky. The diet must be especially digestible and
high in protein (20-25% protein on a dry matter basis) so as to replace all the protein
being lost through the leaky GI tract. Further, the diet should be no more than 15% fat on
a dry matter basis (lower for more severely affected patients). Reading a diet label shows
percentages on an "as fed" basis, so to compare diets, it is necessary to convert values to
a dry matter basis through knowing the moisture content. To see how this is done read
How to Convert Food Values below. There are therapeutic diets available for diseases like

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Intestinal Lymphangiectasia (Protein-losing Enteropathy) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951862&ind=189&objTypeID=1007 3/4
this one where fat restriction is crucial. Non-prescription diets are unlikely to meet the
above criteria but if you know how to read the food label properly you may be able to find
one. Injectable vitamin supplements are likely to be needed.
Severely affected dogs will find even the fat content of the prescription diets too high and
may need to begin with what is called an "elemental diet." These are typically made for
humans and are powders that can be mixed with water. They are not nutritionally
balanced for dogs and can only be used for a few weeks. Alternatively, home cooked diets
can be used but a professional veterinary nutritionist should be consulted to get a proper
recipe. Again, because of intestinal absorption issues injectable vitamin supplements are
likely to be needed. Vitamin D3 deficiency is common in protein-losing enteropathies so
expect supplementation to be recommended. The goal is to eventually return to a
standard commercial dog food.
If the underlying condition is treatable then prognosis for lymphangiectasia is good, but if it
it proves resistant, the prognosis is not so positive. Reported survival rates are highly
variable. Understand that lymphangiectasia is unlikely to be cured and at best can be
managed.
How to Convert Food Values from "As Fed" to "Dry Matter"
First, find the "Guaranteed Analysis" on the label of the food. It should look something like
this:
Crude Protein (min) 7.5%
Crude Fat (min) 4%
Crude Fiber (max) 2%
Moisture (max) 76%
In this case the moisture content is 76%. Subtracting from 100%, that means that there is
24% dry matter (the actual food). In other words, this can of puppy food is 76% water and
24% actual nutrients.
To convert the guaranteed analysis numbers to dry matter basis, simply divide them by
the percentage of the diet that is dry matter:
Crude protein: 7.5 divided by 24 = 0.31 or 31%
Crude fat: 4 divided by 24 = 0.166 or 16.6%
Crude fiber: 2 divided by 24 =0.08 or 8%
Foods can only truly be compared by converting to dry matter basis.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951862&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157340
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:25 PM Intestinal Lymphangiectasia (Protein-losing Enteropathy) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951862&ind=189&objTypeID=1007 4/4

 
Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 07, 2025
Published: March 21, 2005
The signs of inflammation in the colon (also
called the large intestine) are the same
regardless of the cause: mucousy diarrhea,
straining to pass stool, cramping, and
sometimes a surprising urgency to "go".
These symptoms can be acute, as is
common with short-term stress like boarding,
returning from boarding, or diet change, or
they can be chronic, as with whipworm
infection or inflammatory bowel disease.
Many people get confused between
inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) and
irritable bowel syndrome (IBS). IBD is a
physical disease in which the intestinal lining
is infiltrated by inflammatory cells. The delicate intestinal lining becomes thickened,
altering the absorption of nutrients. The infiltration can be seen under the microscope,
which is how the diagnosis is confirmed. Inflammatory Bowel Disease is a completely
different disease from Irritable Bowel Syndrome, so if you are looking for information on
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, please click the link above.
IBS is a psychosomatic disease. It is the activity of the mind that causes the symptoms. Most people have ha
intestinal distress, be it cramping, nausea, diarrhea or all of the above. The medical definition of IBS for huma
for at least three months.
Chronic anxiety can similarly result in chronic diarrhea. This is basically what IBS is all
about. Intestinal biopsy results are normal because there is nothing directly wrong with the
large intestine. The process is the same whether the patient is human or non-human.
Large intestinal diarrhea in veterinary patients can have many causes, and IBS is afoot in
about 10-15% of cases. It is important to rule out physical causes before blaming
psychological reasons.
Still, if all tests are normal and treatment for physical problems is not yielding results, this
is when a biopsy is helpful. If after medication trials, diet trials, and diagnostic tests,
including biopsy, are all normal, then it is time to consider IBS.
It should be noted that fresh blood in the diarrhea is common with large intestinal
diarrheas but not so much with the large intestinal diarrhea of IBS. Fresh blood in the
diarrhea is a sign of a physical cause, not a psychosomatic cause. Knowing this can help
direct the medical approach.
Treatment of IBS

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952228&ind=190&objTypeID=1007 1/3
IBS is most commonly addressed via the GI tract rather than the psyche. Increasing
dietary fiber is helpful to many IBS patients, as fiber has been found to help normalize the
spasms of the large intestinal muscles, and many therapeutic high-fiber diets are sold
through veterinary hospitals. If your pet finds these unpalatable, ask your veterinarian
about how to add wheat bran or a commercial fiber supplement to a diet your pet prefers.
There are presently several commercial dog foods that contain calming supplements.
Using one of these, plus a fiber supplement, might cover both the fiber angle and the
anxiety.
IBS can be managed either through the GI tract or through the psyche. Some effective
human remedies have not been evaluated for animals, but others have been:
Insoluble Fiber
Fiber can be either insoluble (meaning it doesn't dissolve in water) or soluble (meaning it
does dissolve in water). Soluble fiber becomes a gel in the GI tract and feeds the bacteria
(acting as a "prebiotic") in the colon, whereas insoluble fiber draws water into the colon to
make a softer stool. Only insoluble fiber has been found helpful in human IBS. There are
several veterinary diets combining both soluble and insoluble fiber.
Probiotics
Probiotics are live cultures of "helpful" bacteria that one takes orally. These bacteria
populate the intestine, producing helpful biochemicals and consuming harmful
biochemicals. They do not permanently populate the GI tract, so after they are no longer
consumed, they have no lasting effects. There are many veterinary probiotics available,
but it is best to check with your veterinarian about which one to use. A probiotic is a live
culture with an emphasis on the word "live." The bacteria must live in the package on a
shelf and must be able to survive the acid of the stomach and travel to the correct area of
the GI tract. Many products are marketed that are not able to accomplish any of this.
Anxiety Management
A number of supplements have recently been marketed to address anxiety (not to mention
pheromone products). These are not as strong as prescription drugs but are available
without prescription for those who wish to try them:
Alpha Casozepine: This is a milk protein with natural calming properties. It is available as
an oral supplement (Zylkene ) for pets or in special calming pet foods (Royal Canin Calm
Diet , Hills Urinary Stress C/d for Cats ).
L-Theanine: This is a derivative of green tea and is available in capsules and flavored
chews (Anxitane , Solliquin , Composure ).
Adaptil Defuser and Collars: Dog Appeasement Pheromone, or D.A.P., is naturally
secreted by mother dogs to communicate safety and security to her litter of puppies. This
pheromone has been synthesized and is available as a room spray, plug-in wall defuser,
and impregnated collar that the dog can wear. This gives the anxious dog a message in
their own language that there is nothing to be anxious about.
Cannabinoids: These are controversial and are not presently legal except as hemp
products, which may be appropriate. CBD is commonly marketed for pets, but at present,
none of the recent legalization efforts have included pet products, and quality control is
lacking.
A more aggressive approach might be addressing the anxiety with medications. The
source of emotional stress may not be obvious. Still, general anti-anxiety medications
such as amitriptyline, clomipramine, or fluoxetine may be of use, particularly if the anxiety
source is not clear or cannot be removed. Some patients will respond to supplements as
listed above. It is important to imagine the pet’s world from their perspective. Your pet
®
® ®
® ® ®

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952228&ind=190&objTypeID=1007 2/3
does not speak English and must infer what is happening directly from events they
witness. Inconsistent scheduling, moving to a new home, noisy construction nearby, or
weather changes can confuse an animal.
Consult your veterinarian if you wish to pursue one of these therapies. However, keep in
mind that IBS is not diagnosed until a medical workup for physical causes of large bowel
diarrhea has not shown any reason for illness.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952228&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157365
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Irritable Bowel Syndrome (IBS) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952228&ind=190&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 09, 2024
Published: January 06, 2014
Pets have the unfortunate tendency to eat things they shouldn't, and we aren't talking
about food. Toys, socks, rocks and other materials find their way into pet stomachs but
when the foreign body is a string, the consequences are especially dire.
Animals like to play with things and play often involves chewing. Chewing leads to
accidental swallowing and from there potential disaster can ensue. Pets of any age will
play with toys but it is generally the youngsters who get into trouble with foreign bodies.
Common objects, or foreign bodies, that are swallowed include:
Corn cobs
Balls
Socks and underwear
Rocks
Jewelry
Toys
Leashes and collars
Plastic bags (especially if there has been food inside)
Pieces of shoes
Coins (pennies are especially dangerous)
Sewing needles
Fish hooks
The list goes on. Playing escalates to chewing, which escalates to swallowing, or the
object may be outright mistaken for food and swallowed. Often these objects will pass out
the other end in a day or two, though it is possible for a small object to rattle around inside
the stomach without passing for weeks. If the object does not pass and causes
obstruction or partial obstruction, surgery will be needed to remove it. Prompt diagnosis
allows for prompt removal of the foreign body before the bowel is badly damaged. In more
advanced situations, sections of damaged bowel must be removed and in the worst
possible scenario, the intestine breaks open and spills bacteria and digested food
throughout the abdomen. This latter possibility is associated with very high mortality and is
to be avoided at all costs.
The foreign body patient develops a poor appetite and vomiting fairly quickly. Listlessness
comes soon after. Pain may be difficult to recognize and may simply appear as
listlessness. The sooner the patient is evaluated by the doctor, the better.
The Linear Foreign Body is a Special Situation
As if all this wasn't bad enough, there is an especially bad foreign body situation when the
object is a string or similar linear structure. Common linear foreign bodies might include
string or yarn (especially for kittens) or a towel or cloth leash where the fabric has not
been completely chewed through and long threads are exposed.

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=6075371&ind=191&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Illustration by Dr. Wendy Brooks
Drawstring laying flat. Photo by MarVistaVet
Drawstring gathered up, bunching the material. Photo
by MarVistaVet
The Drawstring Effect
Imagine a drawstring bag or
pair of pants. Tie a knot in
one end of the drawstring so
that it cannot move and pull
on the other end. The fabric
wads up along the string
channel. If the string is
pulled hard enough and the
knot still will not budge, the
string will actually rip right
through the string channel.
This is what happens in the linear foreign
body scenario. The foreign body lodges
somewhere in the GI tract and will not
move. The string, however, dangles
forward in the GI tract like a drawstring.
The intestine attempts to move it forward
but because the foreign body is lodged,
the bowel ends up inching up the string
similar to the drawstring channel on the
pants. This type of folding upon itself is
called “plication” and is the hallmark of the
linear foreign body. If the foreign body is
not removed, the string will cut through
the intestine leading to life-threatening
peritonitis.
String under the Tongue
The first common linear foreign body
scenario involves a loop of string wrapped
around the base of the tongue. The pet is
chewing on a wad of string, the string gets
tangled and loops are formed, one of the
loops lassos the tongue and the rest is
swallowed. The string dangles down the
esophagus, passes through the stomach
and into the intestine (bowel). The bowel
attempts to pass the wad of string but it
only gets so far. The string around the
tongue becomes taut and the stomach
and bowel are sliced open by the tight string.
The usual victim of the tongue linear foreign body is a cat as cats
commonly play with strings. Veterinarians check under the tongue for
strings when examining vomiting patients. The string can be difficult to
see, especially as many patients are not cooperative about this sort of
examination, and the string may have embedded in the base of the
tongue where it is not easy to see. Sedation may be needed to get a
good look.
Stomach Foreign Body
The other area where linear foreign bodies lodge is the bottom
(pylorus) of the stomach. The stomach has a large storage capacity but
all of its contents must ultimately drain out of the pylorus. If a wad of

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=6075371&ind=191&objTypeID=1007 2/4
In this situation, a
string loops around
the tongue and
dangles out the
stomach. The small
intestine pulls to
move it but it is
stuck looped
around the tongue.
Image by Dr.
Wendy Brooks
String wads up in the base of the
stomach and the small intestine
plicates attempting to move it
forward.
Plicated bowel can be seen in the abdominal
radiograph, gathered along the string. Photo courtesy
of MarVistaVet
A plicated bowel with a linear foreign body inside.
Photo by MarVistaVet
cloth is too big to pass but long strings
dangle forward from its main body, the
intestine will pull at the string, plicating
around the string, until the tight string
simply cuts through.
Diagnosis of Linear Foreign Body
The linear foreign body is particularly
difficult to diagnose. Strings are too
small to see on radiographs and cloth
does not show up on radiographs.
Checking under the tongue for a string is important but not
always possible, and even if a string is there it is not
always visible. Frequently the only hint is evidence of
plication on the radiograph or by ultrasound and even then
the pattern is likely not going to be definitive. The decision to go to surgery is likely going
to have to be made based on how sick the patient looks and innuendo from the imaging.
Surgery
Because of the dire consequences of not
doing surgery when it is needed, it is often
best to opt for surgery earlier rather than
later in the evaluation process. The
patient will need to be rehydrated from
past vomiting prior to surgery and
stabilized. After this exploration may
proceed.
Most likely the foreign body will be
obvious in the stomach and can be
removed at least in part from the stomach
directly. Hopefully, doing this will relieve
the plication and the rest of the foreign
body can be removed from an intestinal
incision. If the bowel is damaged or even
perforated, sections of bowel may require
removal. After surgery, several days in the
hospital may be needed for recovery. If
there is going to be a problem with an
intestinal incision, it is usually seen by the
third day after surgery.
The linear foreign body surgery is
generally considered a higher mortality
situation than those of more simple
foreign bodies.
In a study by Basher and Fowler
published in Veterinary Surgery in 1987,
24 cats with tongue foreign bodies were
examined. Approximately one third of
them were able to avoid surgery by simply cutting the string under the tongue. With the
release of the string tension, the rest of the string was able to pass uneventfully in these
patients. If the cat did not show improved appetite and activity or continued to vomit/get
more listless, then surgical exploration was performed. The point is that there is a fair
chance that the expense and invasiveness of surgery may be avoided in some tongue
foreign body patients.

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=6075371&ind=191&objTypeID=1007 3/4
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6075371&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157394
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:26 PM Linear Foreign Bodies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=6075371&ind=191&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 18, 2023
Published: July 31, 2009
Confirming a liver tumor requires a medical diagnostic journey starting with a sick pet or
perhaps an abnormal lab test. From these beginnings, the journey proceeds through
further blood tests and, ultimately, imaging. Through imaging of the abdomen (stomach),
the liver lobes are evaluated, and a tumor can be verified. Through imaging of the
abdomen, the liver lobes can be evaluated and a tumor verified. We will assume that you
are reading this because the diagnostic process has largely been completed, and a tumor
has been found. At this point, undoubtedly, many questions have emerged and must be
answered in order to make proper choices.
Is this a primary tumor (meaning it arose in the liver) or is it the result of cancer
spread from a primary tumor elsewhere?
Is the tumor benign or malignant?
Is the tumor of a size where surgery is a reasonable option for palliation, if not
cure?
How is the tumor affecting the day-to-day life of the pet, and how will this
change in the future?
How long will the pet be expected to live with or without treatment?
Ultrasound Can Answer Many Questions
Many of these questions can be answered by ultrasound, the most common medium for
evaluating the texture of the liver. Unlike radiography, where all soft tissue appears as the
same texture, ultrasound is able to separate out tissues depending on their water content.
This means that it is possible to see inside the liver and see if there is one tumor or many
and how much normal liver texture is left. Ultrasound can determine what organs show
tumors inside, whether or not local lymph nodes are enlarged (which could indicate
spread of the tumor), and whether or not surgery would be useful. It is also possible to
take either a needle aspirate or an actual biopsy to determine the type of tumor, and
knowing the type of tumor will answer remaining questions regarding treatment options,
survival time, etc. In other words, if an ultrasound of the liver has not been done yet, it is
time to do it.
What Happens During an Ultrasound Scan
Sedation is not usually required for imaging or even tissue sampling. The fur is shaved for
best contact with the ultrasound probe. Watch Smudge, the cat, have a liver scan in this
short video.
What is the Difference between a Needle Aspirate and a Biopsy?
A needle aspirate involves sticking a long needle into the abnormal area and withdrawing
cells for analysis. This is usually done with ultrasound guidance so as to avoid hitting any
large blood vessels and to make sure the desired area is sampled. The advantage of the

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952830&ind=192&objTypeID=1007 1/4
needle aspirate is that anesthesia or sedation of the sick patient is generally not
necessary, there is less potential for bleeding than with biopsy, and results may be
obtained as soon as overnight in many cases. The disadvantage is that the sample
obtained consists of cells only, and the architecture connecting these cells is lost.
Diagnosis will be less specific and may consist of conceptual information like benign vs.
malignant, inflammatory vs. not-inflammatory, etc. Some tumors, such as the mast cell
tumor or lymphoma, readily release their cells, and architecture is not needed for
diagnosis. Other tumors are not so readily distinguished, and there is greater potential for
a frustrating non-diagnostic sample result than there is with a biopsy.
A biopsy yields a very different sample: a chunk of tissue. In this sample, the microscopic
structures of the liver can be viewed, as can the cells infiltrating them. The architecture of
the tissue is preserved. Tumors can be graded for the degree of malignancy, plus the
specific type of tumor is revealed. The downside stems from the fact that a larger piece of
tissue is required. Clotting tests must be run prior to the procedure to ensure that the liver
will not bleed. A different type of needle is used, and some sort of sedation is typically
needed, which may add risk. Results typically take longer for a biopsy sample as the
laboratory preparation is more complicated. Expense is generally greater for biopsy than
for aspirate.
The ultrasonographer is typically in a good position to determine the best balance of risk,
expense, and potential information yield.
A correct diagnosis is obtained in 60% of needle aspirates of the liver. A correct
diagnosis is obtained in 90% of liver biopsies. Bleeding occurs in 5 percent of
sampled patients, with bleeding graded as moderate in those that had biopsies
and mild in those that had aspirates.
Metastatic Cancer
If cancer is found in the liver but is believed not to have originated there, this indicates
cancer spread and advanced disease. Prognosis is poor, though what options remain
depend on the type of cancer. Metastatic disease in the liver is approximately two and a
half times more common than primary cancer in the liver, with most tumors having spread
from the spleen, pancreas, or intestinal tract.
Liver cancer is an area that not all veterinarians are comfortable treating. Discuss with
your veterinarian whether a referral to an oncologist would be best for you and your pet.
Classifying Primary Tumors of the Liver
Again, a primary liver tumor is a tumor that arose in the liver (rather than having spread
there from a primary tumor elsewhere). Primary tumors are classified by their
shape/configuration within the liver and by the type of liver tissue they originated from.
Tumors may be massive, nodular, or diffuse. The best one to have is the massive type, as
it is in one area and is thus the most amenable to surgical removal. A diffuse tumor
involves the entire liver evenly, while a nodular tumor forms discreet bumps within the
liver. While ultrasound can tell us if a tumor is massive, nodular, or diffuse, it cannot tell us
the tissue of origin.
The four tissues of origin for primary liver tumors are hepatocellular, bile duct,
neuroendocrine (also called carcinoid), and mesenchymal.
Hepatocellular Tumors (the Most Common Liver Tumors in Dogs and Cats)
There are three types of hepatocellular tumors that dogs and cats can have:
hepatocellular carcinoma (the most common hepatocellular tumor of dogs), hepatocellular
adenoma (the most common hepatocellular tumor of cats), and the hepatoblastoma
(which is exceedingly rare and has only been reported twice).

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952830&ind=192&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Dr. Brooks removes hepatocellular carcinoma. Tumor
size is characteristically large. Photo courtesy of
MarVistaVet
The hepatocellular adenoma is benign and does not cause illness. It might cause some
blood changes that in turn can trigger a medical work up, but if a biopsy turns up this
tumor in an otherwise healthy pet, the news is good and nothing bad should be expected
to come of it. Alternatively, if this diagnosis is made in a pet that is sick, the illness
probably cannot be blamed on this tumor and a further search for the right diagnosis is
warranted.
The hepatocellular carcinoma is an important tumor of dogs and cats, not only because it
is moderately common but because it tends to be amenable to surgery even though it is
malignant. In humans, this tumor often has a viral basis (i.e. one of the hepatitis viruses)
as well as an association with cirrhosis (scarring in the liver) but in dogs and cats neither
of these associations holds true.
Most hepatocellular carcinomas (50-80%) are massive, 16-25% are nodular, and 19% are
diffuse. In dogs, the rate of metastasis (cancer spread) is 90-100% for cases with either
nodular or diffuse hepatocellular carcinoma but only 37% for those with massive disease.
If the dog or cat has a massive tumor, surgery
can greatly improve life quality even if the
entire tumor cannot be removed. The
hepatocellular carcinoma grows slowly, so
surgery, while challenging, typically produces
excellent results. The risks of surgery include
bleeding, circulatory compromise to the
remaining liver portions, reduced liver function
after surgery, and transient low blood sugar.
The time of greatest risk and concern is the
time of the surgery and during surgical
recovery. After recovery, one study found a
median survival time of 1460 days (4 years). If
the tumor is on the right side of the liver,
surgery is more difficult because the vena
cava, the largest vein in the body, is close by
and may bleed. The bottom line is that massive disease should be addressed with surgery
with the potential for cure, while nodular or diffuse disease has a poor prognosis.
Bile Duct Tumors
There are two types of bile duct tumors to be had by dogs and cats: biliary adenoma
(benign) and biliary carcinoma (malignant.) The biliary adenoma is the most common
primary liver tumor in cats and accounts for over 50 percent of all feline primary liver
tumors. They are cystic in structure, meaning they tend to be large and fluid-filled. They do
not cause problems until they are so big that they press on other organs, but because
they are fluid-filled, the fluid can be periodically sucked out with ultrasound guidance to
restore health, or the tumor can be removed surgically once and for all.
The biliary carcinoma can be massive, nodular, or diffuse. If the tumor is massive, surgery
is generally recommended, though this tumor is so malignant that survival times after
surgery are typically only about 6 months. Metastasis ultimately occurs in just under 80
percent in cats and just over 80 percent in dogs.
Neuroendocrine Tumors
These tumors are rare and usually diffuse (2/3 of cases are diffuse and 1/3 are nodular).
They tend to spread quickly and early in their course. The prognosis is poor, and because
they are rare tumors, few studies are available to suggest treatment.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952830&ind=192&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Mesenchymal Tumors
The word mesenchyma (mezz-en-KY-ma) does not exactly roll off one's tongue. The
mesenchyma of the liver is the general liver tissue separate from the bile ducts and some
other parts inside the liver. Tumors of the mesenchyma are called sarcomas.
Primary sarcomas of the liver are unusual but include hemangiosarcoma (a malignancy of
blood vessels, which is a common secondary tumor, but only 5 percent of
hemangiosarcomas arise in the liver), fibrosarcoma (malignancy of fibrous tissue),
osteosarcoma (bone malignancy), and leiomyosarcoma (smooth muscle malignancy).
Approximately 36 percent of sarcomas are massive, and 64 percent are nodular, with
metastasis found in 80-100 percent of cases, depending on the study. Massive tumors of
other types are generally amenable to surgery, but in the case of sarcomas, the tumor has
already begun to spread. Some tumors can be treated with chemotherapy.
One Last Tumor
The myelolipoma of cats is worth mentioning as it carries an excellent prognosis with
surgery. This is a benign and often large tumor consisting of fat mixed with blood cell
precursors. Current theory is that it develops in response to poor oxygenation in a
particular area. Once removed, it should not grow back.
Hopefully, this summary has been helpful in reviewing the possible tumors and what to
expect based on how they appear on ultrasound.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952830&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157422
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Liver Tumors and Cancers in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952830&ind=192&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Bear is sitting in a Bailey chair for vertical feeding, to help
get food to the stomach. Photo by Dr. Sherri Wilson.
Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs
Kathy J. Morris-Stilwell, DVM
Revised: November 18, 2024
Published: July 22, 2013
Managing a dog's megaesophagus takes
effort and can be frustrating. Familiarizing
yourself with a variety of appropriate
management techniques can help you
provide a plan for your individual dog. This
article is meant to provide management
techniques while encouraging discussion
between pet owners and veterinarians on
how to manage an individual pet with
megaesophagus, a condition of the
esophagus.
When a dog's esophagus is healthy, it
squeezes food down into the stomach by
contracting and relaxing. In an animal with
megaesophagus, the tube-like esophagus
doesn't contract. It remains paralyzed and
enlarged, and it cannot push food through.
The diseased esophagus interrupts the
reflexes that stop the dog from breathing
while swallowing. The esophagus can fill
with fluid and food, which predisposes the
pet to aspirate the material into the lungs.
Food is slow to empty from the esophagus
into the stomach. The food can be
regurgitated out of the mouth or it can
be aspirated into the lungs, resulting in pneumonia.
Megaesophagus is more common in dogs than in cats, but the following management
techniques can be used in cats and even in ferrets. Keeping a journal as to what does or
doesn’t work well is helpful for both owner and the veterinarian.
Every dog with megaesophagus, unless it is clearly congenital (present from birth), should
be tested for myasthenia gravis and Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism). Less
commonly implicated are lead poisoning (if you live in a house that may contain lead
paint, or you use lead-based paint ceramic bowls), polyneuropathy, polymyopathy, certain
parasites, and severe inflammation (esophagitis). If your efforts are not making a
difference, discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a neurologist or other
specialist would be best for you and your pet.
Any of the following management techniques should be discussed with your veterinarian
prior to being incorporated into your treatment plan.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 1/8
It is usually best to change one medication or technique at a time so as not to confuse
what is or is not helping.
Esophagitis
Regurgitation of stomach contents (acid) into the esophagus, especially over a long
period, allows severe irritation of its lining, a condition called esophagitis. Prescription
Carafate (sucralfate) liquid can be used as a "bandage" for the esophagus. It should be
given an hour before or two hours after any other medication or food. The pet should be
held vertically for at least 5 to 10 minutes after administration. The tablets, although less
costly, do not seem to be as helpful, even if they are crushed and mixed with water.
Esophagitis can only be diagnosed via endoscopy, which means scoping the esophagus
while the pet is anesthetized. However, most cases of suspected esophagitis are treated
without such diagnostics since esophagitis is common with frequent regurgitation.
During an episode of esophagitis, it may be a good idea to replace any oral (by mouth)
medications with available injectable drugs. Your veterinarian or veterinary technician can
instruct you on how to give the injections.
Administering an acid neutralizer such as Pepcid (famotidine), Prilosec (omeprazole) or
ranitidine (no longer available in the US) decreases the acidity of the stomach contents.
Prescription acid neutralizers can be tried. Tums and Tagamet (cimetidine) are virtually
useless in effectively decreasing the acidity. Zantac also has some pro-motility effects, so
it may be considered. Some pets do best with a combination of acid-neutralizers given two
to three times daily.
Esophagitis is very painful, so analgesics such as gabapentin or tramadol may be
considered, especially during initial treatment.
Severe esophagitis can result in nausea, for which prescription anti-emetics such as
Cerenia (maropitant) or Zofran (ondansetron) may be helpful. Cerenia can be administered
either as a pill or by injection.
Other Potentially Helpful Medications
Several other medications may help individual pets.
Sildenafil or tadanafil can loosen the Lower Esophageal Sphincter (LES), allowing the
esophagus to empty into the stomach more easily, reducing the possibility of regurgitation.
Pro-motility drugs such as Reglan (metoclopramide), cisapride, or low-dose erythromycin
can help the stomach to stay empty, which minimizes the amount of food in the stomach
that can be refluxed into the esophagus. To purchase cisapride, your veterinarian will write
a prescription to be sent to a compounding pharmacy as it is not currently available
through pharmacies. Rarely, a pet will have cardiac issues, which requires discontinuing
cisapride.
A few dogs in the megaesophagus support group have side effects from metoclopramide.
They act restless or nervous, and owners report that the dogs seem to "see ghosts."
Symptoms disappear within a few hours. Either a lower dose can be tried or a different
pro-motility (spontaneous movement) drug can be used.
Bethanechol can help esophageal motility in a very small percentage of megaesophagus
cases in which there may still be some loss of the nerves' ability to perform adequately.
Antibiotics may be necessary if the dog has aspiration pneumonia, in which case they
should be given for four-to-six weeks.
For dogs with aspiration pneumonia, medications to break up mucous (mucolytics) and to
help material in the lungs be coughed up (expectorants) can be used, but they do not
seem to make a big difference. Mucomyst (acetylcysteine) can be helpful if given as a pill;

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 2/8
This cat is being held vertically using a Snugli; small dogs
can be given food or water this way. Photo Dr. Kathy
Morris-Stilwell
veterinarians used to advise that it be nebulized (aerosolized into a spray), but it is
irritating when given that way.
Some dogs with megaesophagus may require low-fat therapeutic diets available through
your veterinarian. For those with food intolerances or allergies, try a therapeutic
hypoallergenic diet.
Regurgitation
Regurgitation differs from vomiting in that there are usually no warning signs and no
retching/abdominal contractions first. The material just comes passively out of the dog.
Note that deciding whether you’re seeing regurgitation vs vomiting is determined not by
WHAT or WHEN the material is brought up, but HOW the material is brought up: i.e., does
the dog retch first? Preventing all regurgitation may not be possible. As megaesophagusdog owners say, "Regurg happens." It may be normal and acceptable for some dogs to
regurgitate a small amount several times daily. However, if it is unusual for a pet to
regurgitate, or if it becomes more frequent, investigate the cause. Increased frequency of
regurgitation is common in pets who may be developing aspiration pneumonia or other
gastrointestinal disorders such as antibiotic-responsive gastroenteropathy.
Water
Water should be offered only when the pet
is in a vertical position. If your dog is
exercising, such as at a dog park, offer
water and hold the dog vertically for at
least 5 minutes after drinking and longer
for a lot of water. This can be
accomplished by training your dog to allow
you to hold him vertically with his back
resting against your legs.
The appropriate amount of water can
usually be provided with the food, so the
dog doesn’t have to drink from a bowl. Do
not allow your pet access to water bowls,
toilets, puddles, sinks, etc. If you have
multiple pets, you may have to offer water
to them several times daily but not leave
water available for the megaesophagus
dog.
If your pet is dehydrated, or your
veterinarian feels that he needs additional
fluids at certain times, you can be shown
how to give fluids subcutaneously (under
the skin, often called SQ or SUBQ).
Some dogs are unable to drink water
normally because they regurgitate it.
Adding water in the food can be helpful.
Knox Blocks may be another way of
supplementing fluid intake; Thicks It or
Thick 'n' Easy powder can be added to
water to make it easier for those dogs to drink. Your veterinarian can compute your pet's
daily fluid and calorie requirements.
Two Knox Blocks recipes to increase fluid intake are:

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 3/8
 1 cup cold low-sodium chicken broth.
 Stir 4 packages of Knox gelatin into broth.
Add 3 cups of boiling water and stir until dissolved.
 Pour liquid into a 9 × 15 casserole dish and refrigerate until solid, approximately 2–3
hours.
 Cut the mixture into dice-size cubes.
OR
 6 cups boiling water.
 8 packets of Knox gelatin.
 2 cups chicken broth.
Add Knox packets to chicken broth.
Add gelatin and chicken broth to boiling water. Stir to melt gelatin.
 Put in pan and refrigerate. This recipe makes 64 oz. of chicken-flavored gelatin.
Exercise
Some dogs appear to receive benefits from walking 5 to 10 minutes before and/or after
food or water. Additionally, most dogs can eventually exercise and play as do healthy
dogs. Some dogs in the support group participate in agility and some even go hunting with
their owners.
Feeding
Position
Offering food, water and treats with the pet in a vertical position (i.e., sitting up in a
begging pose) is one of the most important ways in which to manage these patients. This
is a non-negotiable management technique required by almost all pets with
megaesophagus. Because the esophagus is paralyzed, if the dog is not fed vertically or is
just fed in an elevated position, we cannot take advantage of gravity. Gravity allows food,
water, and medications to FALL through the esophagus into the stomach.
A Bailey Chair, named for the inventor's
dog, encourages appropriate and
successful feeding techniques. The
Internet offers several megaesophagus
support groups and instructions for building
a Bailey Chair. Correct construction of the
chair is encouraged for both the dog's
comfort and willingness to use it. Please be
patient while teaching your pet to sit in the
Bailey Chair—some dogs catch on quickly,
and some more slowly. See Diyoji get into
his Bailey Chair and eat in this video.
Some of the most critical changes the
owner of an affected dog must make
immediately after diagnosis are the amount
of food offered at each feeding, the number
of meals per day, and the format. The
format should be either liquefied food,
blended to a smooth consistency in a
blender, or food compressed into meatball
form swallowed whole to avoid pieces or
particles that can irritate the esophageal
lining; the irritation increases regurgitation
and risk of aspiration. Generally, the goal is
to get more calories and nutrients into less

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 4/8
Bailey, whose owner designed the original Bailey Chair, sits
ready to eat. Photo by matthew1@earthlink.net, with
permission from Dr. Kathy Morris-Stilwell
This dog wears a Pro-collar and a basket muzzle - Photo by
Dr. Kathy Morris-Stilwell
volume. Cautious trial and error will help
the owner determine whether the dog
tolerates the blended type - which also
assists with consistent hydration of the dog
better - or the meatball type. Most dogs require several smaller meals spaced about three
hours apart, while others can work up to larger meals that are provided less frequently.
The owner should not try to replace lost weight too quickly on these dogs. First, finding
what reliably gets to the stomach and stays down is key.
Diet
High-fat diets may encourage regurgitation. If you are concerned about putting weight on
your pet, it is better to get the regurgitation under control first. Low-fat prescription diets
seem to be better tolerated by dogs with megaesophagus, especially at the initial
diagnosis. You would not want a high-fiber diet as it can be difficult to maintain body
weight on one; we want a low-fat diet that is not high in fiber. Ask your veterinarian for
suggestions.
Raw diets are not suggested for these pets because, with the increased risk of aspirating
regurgitated stomach contents, bacteria in the unprocessed food can be a risk.
Additionally, rice also seems to be poorly tolerated by these pets. If you wish to prepare
your pet's food, it is strongly suggested that you contact a veterinary nutritionist (ask your
veterinarian for a referral) so that a balanced diet can be created. Many nutritionists also
provide appropriate supplements; it is nearly impossible for an owner to collect all of the
micro-nutrients that are best for a balanced diet. Adding coconut milk to a diet can add
calories as well as liquid.
Many dogs and cats can eventually eat regular pet food once their ideal consistency is
discovered. The ideal consistency will produce the least regurgitation. Some pets do well
with a watery gruel, some with food formed like meatballs, and some can eat canned dog
food. A RARE dog/cat will be able to tolerate dry food. At least when you are first starting
to manage these pets, it is best to start with watery or pudding-like food. All pets differ in
what food consistency is ideal for them, and experimenting is necessary.
Most dogs need to be held vertically for 20 to 30 minutes to allow the food and water to
descend into the stomach with the help of gravity. Many (5-6) small daily meals may be
necessary, especially during the initial management of megaesophagus. Most pets can do
well with three daily feedings.
Feed calorie-dense, lower-fat diets. Because fat stays in the stomach longer than protein
or carbohydrates, it can encourage more frequent regurgitation into the esophagus from
the stomach.
Access to items that the pet may consider
as "food" must be restricted: feces, chew
bones/rawhides, products on counters, cat
food, etc. A basket muzzle may be worn by
dogs when outside if needed (the foot
portion from a nylon stocking may be
placed over the muzzle to prevent the dog
from licking between the bars of the
muzzle, but make sure it does not prevent
airflow). Do not use muzzles that prevent
the mouth from opening.
Feeding Tubes
If a pet cannot eat or continues to
regurgitate, a feeding tube may need to be
placed. These percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tubes must be placed while
the pet is under anesthesia, and can be inserted quickly by a veterinarian who has some

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 5/8
experience. Most can be placed without surgery, but if the esophagus is too damaged or
has any strictures, the feeding tube may need to be placed surgically. Unfortunately, many
owners wait too long to consider having the tube placed.
Aspiration Pneumonia
Aspiration pneumonia (AP) is one of the most common complications of megaesophagus,
and can quickly become life-threatening. The lungs can become infected quickly. Signs of
AP can show up very quickly in these pets, but some can develop symptoms over a few
days. Coughing doesn't always occur initially, so you need to have a high index of
suspicion if his appetite decreases or lethargy develops. Aspiration pneumonia can be
severe within hours of the initial signs, so seek out veterinary care sooner rather than
later.
Unfortunately, abnormalities due to AP cannot always be heard with a stethoscope,
making X-rays imperative. Three X-ray views are required as aspiration pneumonia may
not be easily perceived with just one or two. To make matters worse, the X-ray signs of AP
may not show up for one-to-two days. That being said, if there is any suggestion by either
clinical signs or X-ray changes, it is better to treat rather than wait, as these pets can
deteriorate quickly.
Appropriate antibiotics should usually be given for four-to-six weeks. Recheck X-rays
should be taken before discontinuing antibiotics. The best way of determining the ideal
antibiotic is for material to be collected directly from the lungs via a transtracheal wash or
bronchoalveolar lavage. However, because these procedures are somewhat invasive,
veterinarians usually administer empirical (medical best guess) antibiotics. These
diagnostic procedures are done only if the AP cannot be brought under control.
Nebulization with albuterol helps treat AP. For your veterinarian, there is an example of
how to prescribe albuterol at this link. Percussion therapy (coupage) can help break up
any debris that is within the lungs. This is also demonstrated at the above link. Nebulizers
can be purchased through some pharmacies, medical supply houses, or even on eBay.
Useful brands of nebulizers include PulmoMate, PulmoNaide, and Omron. Some owners
of dogs who develop frequent AP find that routine, daily nebulization is helpful in curtailing
re-infection. An oxygen mask is needed for administration. These can be purchased from
your veterinarian. You can make do with a temporary mask created from a plastic glass,
even with a Solo cup.
Nebulization is not needed in all pets with megaesophagus, but rather for those who
develop AP or in whom it frequently recurs.
WARNING: Albuterol should not be given to pets by people who have heart or
lung disorders. Ask your physician if it is safe for you to be exposed to albuterol.
Albuterol is used in inhalers and nebulizers to treat asthma and other lung disorders in
people and animals.
Sleeping
Having pets sleep with their front end elevated and/or wearing a balloon-type collar to
keep their head elevated may help not only with the treatment of AP but may minimize
future attacks.
These techniques may minimize the flow of nighttime regurgitation into the back of the
throat, and therefore minimize micro-aspiration.
When pets lay down, material from the stomach can flow into the esophagus and then into
the back of the throat. That material can then be inhaled into the trachea and lungs. By
having the pet wear a Pro-collar (neck hug, neck balloon) the head is kept elevated so

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 6/8
This dog sleeps wearing a Procollar. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Kathy Morris-Stilwell.
Dyer is held vertically by his owner after his neuter surgery
- Photo by Dr. Kathy Morris-Stilwell
that less can trickle down into the lungs
causing a sort of micro-aspiration. Some
pets wear these only at night; others wear
them 24/7. They can be purchased at pet
stores, over the Internet, or can be
handmade.
Anesthesia
Most owners are afraid of having any
anesthetic procedures performed on their
pets with megaesophagus. With a few
precautions, surgical and dental
procedures can be performed safely under
anesthesia. Ask your veterinarian to follow
these suggestions to minimize any
problems.
1. In dogs who can tolerate it, pretreat with metoclopramide and
maropitant one half-hour before
anesthesia induction to encourage
the stomach to empty.
2. Elevate the head end of the
surgical table or place the patient
on a slant so that the head is
above the rear end. This minimizes
the reflux of stomach contents into
the esophagus.
3. It’s important to leave the
endotracheal tube in until the dog
is actively swallowing to minimize
aspiration.
4. Maintain elevation of the pet’s front end, preferably in a vertical position (body
perpendicular to the floor) while recovering from anesthesia. This vertical
elevation allows any fluid that has accumulated in the esophagus to drain into
the stomach. Any fluid build-up in the esophagus can be easily refluxed and
cause AP in dogs who have megaesophagus. Preventing regurgitation at all
costs is critical.
Treats and Training
Most pets with megaesophagus cannot receive normal treats. Many dogs produce a large
amount of saliva if they even smell food or treats, causing regurgitation. Your attention is
probably your pet's best treat. Verbal praise and petting can be a successful training tool.
Resolution of Megaesophagus
Many owners are hopeful that their pet's megaesophagus will resolve, especially if it is
caused by another disorder. Although possible, this only happens about 15 percent of the
time it occurs in older dogs. We do see some German shepherd puppies outgrow their
megaesophagus, but that is rare. Megaesophagus is usually a lifetime disorder. These
dogs can live high-quality lives, especially if their individual management protocol can be
developed.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 7/8
Owners frequently wonder how long their dogs can live with megaesophagus, and the
answer is that as long as they can be kept at a good weight and aspiration pneumonia
attacks can be controlled, these dogs can live fairly long, normal lives. For example,
Bailey, of the Bailey Chair fame, died of lung cancer at almost 13 years of age.
For further encouragement, owners can visit:
The Bailey Chair website.
Join the Facebook support group 'Managing Megaesophagus and/or
Myasthenia Successfully'.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5887292&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157446
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Managing Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=5887292&ind=193&objTypeID=1007 8/8

Normal swallowing: Coordinated muscle movements in the
esophagus drive the food into the stomach. Photo by
MarVistaVet
Megaesophagus in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 03, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
What is Megaesophagus?
Have you ever thought about how chewedup food makes it from the throat to the
stomach? The esophagus is the tube that
connects the throat to the stomach, but the
transport of food is far from passive. When
food is perceived in the esophagus, a
neurologic reflex causing sequential
muscle contraction and relaxation leads to
rapid transport of the food into the
stomach, like an elevator going down. The
process is active, highly coordinated, and
includes other reflexes that close off the
airways so that food material is not
accidentally inhaled into the lungs.
When these reflexes are interrupted, such
as by disease in the esophageal tissue or
by nerve disease, the esophagus loses its
ability to actively transport food. Instead, the esophagus loses all tone and enlarges
(dilates). Reflexes protecting the lung are disrupted and aspiration pneumonia commonly
follows. The flaccid air-filled esophagus that results is called a megaesophagus.
Vomiting Versus Regurgitation
When the esophagus loses all tone and dilates, it cannot coordinate the movement of food
into the stomach properly. As a result, food tends to simply roll around in the esophagus
according to gravity and ultimately tends to be regurgitated back onto the floor. This is not
the same as vomiting; in fact, it is completely different.
Most people do not realize that there is a difference between vomiting and regurgitation.
Vomiting is an active process. There is gagging, heaving, and retching as the body
actively expels its stomach contents. Furthermore, there is an associated sensation of
nausea allowing for some warning of what is about to occur. A nauseated patient looks
uncomfortable and may drool or lick his lips prior to the vomiting motions. Regurgitation,
on the other hand, is passive. Regurgitation is the hallmark sign of megaesophagus.
What Causes Megaesophagus?
There are two types of megaesophagus: congenital megaesophagus (born with it) and
acquired megaesophagus, which usually develops during adulthood.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Yellow lines trace the outline of a megaesophagus in canine chest
X-ray.
Congenital Megaesophagus
Most cases involve young puppies;
Great Danes, Irish setters,
Newfoundlands, German Shepherds,
Shar Pei, and Labrador retrievers are
genetically predisposed. In these
cases, the condition is believed to be
congenital, though it often does not
show up until the pup begins to try
solid food. Congenital
megaesophagus is believed to occur
due to incomplete nerve development
in the esophagus. The good news is
that nerve development may improve
as the pet matures. Prognosis is thus
better for congenital megaesophagus
than it is for megaesophagus
acquired during adulthood, with
recovery rates of 20-46 percent reported in different studies. Most puppies are diagnosed
by age 12 weeks, though mild cases may not be abnormal until closer to age one year.
A similar congenital problem is the vascular ring anomaly. This is a band of tissue
encircling and constricting the esophagus. Such tissue bands are remnants of fetal blood
vessels, which are supposed to disappear before birth. They do not always do so.
Improvement is obtained when the band is surgically cut, but in 60 percent of cases, some
residual regurgitation persists.
Acquired Megaesophagus
Since the regurgitation involved in megaesophagus is challenging to manage, every effort
should be made to minimize it. If the megaesophagus is secondary to another disease,
then there is potential to treat that other disease and greatly improve or even resolve the
megaesophagus. Many conditions have been associated with the development of
megaesophagus, so it is worth screening for the treatable ones.
Myasthenia Gravis
Myasthenia gravis is considered the most common cause of canine megaesophagus and
is the first condition to be ruled out. Myasthenia gravis is a condition whereby the
nerve/muscle junction is destroyed immunologically. Signals from the nervous system sent
to coordinate esophageal muscle contractions simply cannot be received by the muscle.
Megaesophagus is one of its classical signs, though general skeletal muscle weakness is
frequently associated. This condition is treatable and often resolvable, but special testing
is needed to confirm it. Approximately 25% of dogs with acquired megaesophagus have
myasthenia gravis.
Stricture
Scarring in the esophagus (as would occur after a foreign body episode or with damage to
the esophagus from protracted vomiting) may be sufficient to interrupt neurologic
transmissions or even narrow the esophagus so that food cannot pass through it. (Such a
narrowing is called a “stricture.”) Technically, this is not a true megaesophagus as the
muscles are working normally; there is simply an obstruction present. Special balloons
can be inserted in the esophagus to dilate the narrowed area, but some residual
regurgitation is likely to persist. Tumors of the esophagus may have similar effects in that
they, too, can cause obstruction.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease)
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism) has also been associated with megaesophagus.
This condition represents a deficiency of cortisone production by the adrenal gland. This

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 2/6
deficiency alters the metabolism of esophageal muscle. Diagnosis and treatment are not
difficult and, in this situation, the megaesophagus can frequently be resolved if not greatly
improved with treatment.
Esophageal Obstruction
External obstruction of the esophagus could cause a similar syndrome by creating a
blockage. A mass in the chest could pinch the esophagus closed. Depending on the
situation, the obstruction could be relieved greatly, improving the regurgitation potential.
Dysautonomia
A condition once rare in the U.S. is also worth mentioning, and that is dysautonomia.
Dysautonomia patients have a 60% incidence of megaesophagus, and it usually affects
dogs living in rural areas. The syndrome involves a total disruption of the entire autonomic
nervous system leading to difficulty urinating, dilated pupils, flaccid colon (megacolon),
flaccid anal tone, poor tear production, and of course, megaesophagus. Successful
treatment is unlikely, so it is helpful to recognize this constellation of signs from the
beginning so that euthanasia can be considered. Testing for dysautonomia involves
stimulating the autonomic nervous system with drugs and checking for response
(increased heart rate in response to atropine injection, pupil constriction in response to
pilocarpine eye drops, etc.) or lack thereof.
Dermatomyositis
This condition involves a congenital blood vessel defect in the skin, usually in the face and
certain muscles. The abnormal blood vessels lead to poor oxygenation of affected tissues,
and inflammation results as tissue damage occurs from lack of oxygen. The muzzle gets
scabs, and ulcers result, but moderately affected dogs have muscle damage affecting
facial muscles, and megaesophagus can result. Collies and Shetland sheepdogs are
predisposed.
All these conditions must be sorted out in the megaesophagus patient, so let's review
what happens in a typical evaluation of a regurgitating patient.
The Diagnostic Plan
First, the megaesophagus must be diagnosed. This is done with radiographs (x-rays). If
megaesophagus is not obvious on plain films, it is better not to use contrast studies with
barium if possible. This is because megaesophagus patients tend to inhale or aspirate
food contents that back up in their throats. This is dangerous enough when the material is
simply food, but if barium becomes inhaled, the body has great difficulty removing it from
the lungs. Still, sometimes, this is the only way to see the megaesophagus.
Aspiration Pneumonia: A Potentially Life-Threatening Condition
The next step is to determine whether or not the animal has aspiration pneumonia from
inhaling regurgitated food material. The same radiographs used to diagnose the
megaesophagus can be used to determine if the pet has aspiration pneumonia, though
just because the chest is clean at one point does not mean aspiration will not occur in the
future. The owner of the megaesophagus dog must be vigilant for cough, listlessness,
appetite loss, and/or nasal discharge. It is common for the megaesophagus patient to
experience multiple episodes of aspiration pneumonia; it is an ongoing problem and
ongoing concern as long as the pet has megaesophagus.
Chest radiographs in combination with a history of cough, nasal discharge, and the
presence of fever, usually indicate pneumonia. Usually, the chest radiographs will show
disease in the areas of the chest that are lowest in the standing animal, as this is where
gravity draws inhaled material. Aspiration pneumonia makes the case much more serious
as pneumonia can be a life-threatening condition.
Next Steps
After the megaesophagus has been confirmed and the patient has been assessed for
aspiration, diagnostics continue as a search for a treatable underlying cause begins, and

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Isaac in Bailey Chair. Photo
courtesy of the Yahoo!
Megaesophagus Newsgroup
Casper in Bailey Chair. Photo
courtesy of the Yahoo!
Megaesophagus Newsgroup
a search for the medical problems listed above begins. Despite all the diagnostic tests,
however, the majority of megaesophagus cases are “idiopathic,” which means that no
underlying cause can be found. If there is no defined underlying cause for a particular
patient, general management of the megaesophagus is implemented as described below.
Treatment
Food Consistency
The first step is to determine if the dog does better with a liquid or solid diet.
Experimenting with different food consistencies, including water versus ice chips, is
necessary. Some animals do better with solid foods, and some do better with liquefied
diets. If liquids are a problem, water can be provided in gelatin, mixed with a thickener, or
given as ice cubes. Because so much nutrient material is lost in regurgitation,
megaesophagus patients tend to be underweight. Adding a protein supplement such as
whey protein powder can assist in maintaining a normal weight.
Regurgitation is not only messy; it leads to aspiration pneumonia, which is
serious.
     
Vertical Feeding
Vertical feeding can be accomplished in several ways, and
there are different approaches to consider when discussing
with your veterinarian so that you can find what works best
for your dog. If you have a small dog, you may use a frontpack baby or similar pet carrier or even a clean utility bucket
(used only for feeding, not for cleaning) and gently stuff
towels around your dog to be supported and comfortable
while remaining upright to eat.
Medium to large dogs often benefit from a Bailey Chair,
which not only allows vertical feeding but also confines the
patient for the post-feeding waiting period. The Bailey Chair
was invented by the owners of a megaesophagus dog
named Bailey. The more vertical the feeding, the less
regurgitation is likely to result, and in some patients,
regurgitation stops completely. The chair is relatively easy to
construct, and the family who invented the chair is happy to
send an instructional video.
They can be reached through the Megaesophagus Newsgroup
(formerly through Yahoo). Not feeling handy with constructing
your own chair? Measure your dog and buy one.
Feeding Tubes
If vertical feeding does not provide adequate nutrition for the
patient, the gastric feeding tube is an alternative. The tube
allows food to be delivered directly into the stomach, skipping
the diseased esophagus. This does not end regurgitation, as the
animal will still be swallowing saliva throughout the day and
periodically regurgitating it, but the food regurgitation should be
controlled with tube feeding.
A feeding tube is placed by your veterinarian in the stomach either surgically,
endoscopically, or using stomach tube applicators. The tube exits the body from the side
which is comfortable for the pet. A protective bandage is used for daily wear and a clamp
prevents leakage of stomach contents from the tube. The pet owner must be comfortable
changing the dressings around the tube.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 4/6
Food is given as a blended slurry through the tube. A liquid diet can be purchased, but
usually, a thicker food is made with a blender. The tube administers food cleanly with no
spillage. Some water in a syringe is used to clear the tube before and after feeding.
Medications
There are several that can be helpful, targeting different aspects of managing your dog's
condition and keeping them as comfortable as possible.
Sildenafil
While this medication is best known for its human uses (its brand name is Viagra®), it is
important to remember this medication has numerous effects on the autonomic nervous
system. A common problem with megaesophagus is that the sphincter separating the
esophagus and stomach is tightly closed. This keeps food from getting into the stomach,
where it can be digested and moved forward, and leaves food pooling in the esophagus,
where it can be regurgitated.
Sildenafil opens the sphincter between the stomach and the esophagus. This facilitates
getting food out of the esophagus and into the stomach, where it belongs.
Metoclopramide and Cisapride
These medications are motility modifiers, which means they stimulate the smooth muscles
of the GI tract. They also tighten the lower esophageal sphincter, which is a valve-like part
at the end of the esophagus where it meets the stomach. In other words, these
medications close the stomach, keeping food inside it from spilling out and being
regurgitated. Some patients benefit from these medications, and others do better on
sildenafil, which opens that valve instead. Your veterinarian can discuss with you what
may work best for your dog.
Another medication that can help improve the muscle coordination and contraction
strength of the esophagus is bethanechol. This medication helps strengthen the
muscarinic nerve receptors in the esophagus, ultimately improving muscle tone there.
Studies using this medication are ongoing.
Gastroprotection / Antacids
Food that washes out of the stomach and into the esophagus carries stomach acid with it,
which is very damaging to the esophagus (the tube that connects the throat to the
stomach). The acid causes pain and reluctance to swallow (possibly increasing the
potential for aspiration) and can even yield scarring in the esophagus, further reducing
any muscle activity the diseased esophagus still has.
To minimize this sort of esophageal damage, a medication called sucralfate is probably a
good addition to the megaesophagus regimen. Sucralfate forms a protective coating over
any inflamed areas in the esophagus, allowing for healing.
Antacids sound tempting to further mitigate the acid damage from regurgitated stomach
contents, but it is best to avoid these if possible. The reason for this is that stomach acid is
actually helpful if aspiration pneumonia occurs. If there is acid in the aspirated material, it
will be less encouraging to bacteria and provide some protection to the patient. Since
aspiration pneumonia is both serious and common, it may be best to preserve the natural
protection the body offers for this situation.
Anti-nausea Medications
Esophagitis, an inflammation of the esophagus, can cause nausea, which can be treated
with anti-emetic medications. These include Cerenia® (maropitant) or ondansetron.
Nebulizer Treatments
If your dog gets aspiration pneumonia, your veterinarian may recommend nebulizer
treatments, which deliver lung medications in the form of a mist through a muzzle mask
system. These treatments can help to open the lung’s air sacs and help your dog's

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 5/6
congestion by loosening up mucous and debris there, allowing those things to come up
and clear them with coughing. Your veterinarian will recommend a setup that is right for
your dog if they need this treatment.
Prognosis and Summary
This is a life-long disease requiring owner dedication and commitment, and in some
cases, can be challenging to manage. Some dogs may have continued issues throughout
their lives. However, many dogs can have a high quality of life when the right balance of
treatments and at-home management strategies are implemented.
Prevention of aspiration pneumonia and regurgitation are key parts of
managing megaesophagus to help your dog eat and swallow food safely and
prevent complications.
Medical treatments combined with various feeding and at-home care strategies
can help your dog be as healthy and happy as possible.
Be sure your veterinarian has answered all your questions about this condition,
and always follow recheck recommendations.
Many different megaesophagus communities may also be of help and
encouragement.
Further resources:
https://www.k9megaesophagus.com
http://caninemegaesophagusinfo.com
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951482&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157474
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:27 PM Megaesophagus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951482&ind=194&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Graphic by MarVistaVet
Pancreatitis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 18, 2023
Published: January 02, 2006
See article summary below.
The Normal Pancreas and What it Does
The pancreas is a pale pink glandular organ that nestles
cozily just under the stomach and along the first portion
of the small intestine. As a glandular organ, the pancreas
is all about the secretion of biochemicals, and it has two
main jobs: the first job is the secretion of digestive
enzymes to help us break down the nutrients we eat.
The second job is the secretions of insulin and glucagon
(hormones that regulate how we actually use the
nutrients we have eaten). It is the first job (the digestive
enzyme part) that concerns us in pancreatitis.
So, let's go back to the beginning of digestion. We eat
food, chew it up into a slurry, and swallow it. It travels
down the esophagus to the stomach, where it is ground
up further, and enzymes are added to begin the
breakdown of nutrients into pieces (basically into
molecules) small enough for us to absorb. Digestion continues as the food moves down
into the small intestine, where stomach acid is neutralized, and further digestive enzymes
are added (thanks to the pancreas). Food moves down the small intestine further, and the
focus shifts from nutrient digestion to nutrient absorption. By the time the food has
reached the large intestine, it is just undigestible waste and water. The large intestine
absorbs the water, and its bacteria may be able to break down some of the waste. After
that, food comes out the other end into the toilet or litter box.
So, the normal pancreas makes and stores digestive enzymes for use when you need
your meal digested. Keep in mind these enzymes are powerful and made to break down
food. Imagine if they escaped and tried to break down the pancreas itself! Unfortunately,
that is what happens in pancreatitis.
Pancreatitis is Inflammation of the Pancreas
In pancreatitis, inflammation disrupts the normal integrity of the pancreas. Digestive
enzymes are normally stored safely as inactive forms within pancreatic granules so that
they are harmless but in pancreatitis, they are prematurely activated and released
internally, digesting the body itself.
The result can be a metabolic catastrophe. The living tissue becomes further inflamed,
and the tissue damage quickly involves the adjacent liver. Toxins released from this
rampage of tissue destruction are liberated into the circulation and can cause a body-wide

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Graphic by VIN
Inflamed Pancreas
A swollen, inflamed pancreas with
areas of hemorrhage. Graphic by
MarVistaVet
inflammatory response. If the pancreas
is affected so as to disrupt its ability to
produce insulin, diabetes mellitus can
result; this can be either temporary or
permanent.
Specific Pancreatitis Disasters
A syndrome called Weber-Christian
syndrome results, in which fats
throughout the body are destroyed with
painful and disastrous results.
Pancreatitis is one of the chief risk
factors for the development of what is
called disseminated intravascular
coagulation or DIC, which is basically a
massive uncoupling of normal blood
clotting and clot dissolving
mechanisms. This leads to abnormal
simultaneous bleeding and clotting of
blood throughout the body.
Pancreatic encephalopathy (brain damage) can occur if the fats protecting the
central nervous system become digested.
The good news is that most commonly, the
inflammation is confined to the area of the liver and
pancreas but even with this limitation, pancreatitis
can be painful and life-threatening.
Pancreatitis can be acute or chronic, mild or severe.
What Causes Pancreatitis
In most cases, we never find out what causes it, but we
do know some events that can cause pancreatitis.
The area of the small intestine where the pancreas
secretes its enzymes is called the "duodenum." A
small tube called the "pancreatic duct" transports
pancreatic enzymes into the duodenum. Backwash
(reflux) of duodenal contents backward up into the
pancreatic duct can create inflammation in the
pancreas.
The pancreas has numerous safety mechanisms to prevent self-digestion. One of
these mechanisms is the fact that the enzymes it creates are stored in an inactive
form. They are harmless until they are mixed with activating enzymes made by the
duodenum. If duodenal fluids backwash up the pancreatic duct and into the
pancreas, enzymes are prematurely activated, and pancreatitis results. This is
apparently the most common pancreatitis mechanism in humans, though it is not
very common in veterinary patients.
Concurrent hormonal imbalance predisposes a dog to pancreatitis. Such
conditions include Diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, and hypercalcemia. The

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 2/7
first two conditions are associated with altered fat metabolism, which
predisposes to pancreatitis, and the latter condition involves elevated blood
calcium that activates stored digestive enzymes.
Use of certain drugs can predispose to pancreatitis (sulfa-containing antibiotics
such as trimethoprim sulfa, chemotherapy agents such as azathioprine or Lasparaginase, and the anti-seizure medication potassium bromide). Exposure to
organophosphate insecticides has also been implicated as a cause of
pancreatitis. Exposure to steroid hormones has traditionally been thought to be
involved as a potential cause of pancreatitis but this appears not to be true.
Trauma to the pancreas that occurs from a car accident or even surgical
manipulation can cause inflammation and, thus, pancreatitis.
A tumor in the pancreas can lead to inflammation in the adjacent pancreatic
tissue.
A sudden high-fat meal is the classic cause of canine pancreatitis. The sudden
stimulation to release enzymes to digest fat seems to be involved.
Obesity has been found to be a risk factor because of the altered fat
metabolism that goes along with it.
Miniature Schnauzers are predisposed to pancreatitis as they commonly have
altered fat metabolism.
Signs of Pancreatitis
The classical signs in the dog are appetite loss, vomiting, diarrhea, a painful abdomen,
and fever or any combination thereof. Pancreatitis can come on suddenly and seemingly
out of nowhere or it can be a smoldering on-going condition that waxes and wanes.
Making the Diagnosis
Lipase and Amylase Levels (no longer considered reliable)
A reliable blood test has been lacking for this disease until recently. Traditionally, blood
levels of amylase and lipase (two pancreatic digestive enzymes) have been used. When
their levels are especially high, it's reasonable sign that these enzymes have leaked out of
the pancreas, and the patient has pancreatitis, but these tests are not as sensitive or
specific as we would prefer. Amylase and lipase can elevate dramatically with
corticosteroid use, with intestinal perforation, kidney disease, or even dehydration. Some
experts advocate measuring lipase and amylase on fluid from the belly rather than on
blood but this has not been fully investigated and is somewhat invasive.
Pancreatic Lipase Immunoreactivity
A newer test called the PLI, or pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity, test has come to be
important. As mentioned, lipase is one of the pancreatic digestive enzymes and only small
traces are normally in the circulation. These levels jump dramatically in pancreatitis, which
allows for the diagnosis to be confirmed with a non-invasive and relatively inexpensive
test. The PLI test is different from the regular lipase level because the PLI test measures
only lipase of pancreatic origin and thus is more specific. The problem is that technology
needed to run this test is unique and the test can only been run in certain facilities on
certain days. Results are not necessarily available rapidly enough to help a sick patient.

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 3/7
The PLI, or pancreatic lipase
immunoreactivity, test has come to be
important. Photo courtesy of National
Institutes of Mental Health,
Department of Health and Human
Services
Dr. Jon Perlis of DVMSound performs an
ultrasound exam on a dog. Photo by
MarVistaVet
Spec CPL and DGGR Lipase Assay
More recently a new test called the SPEC cPL (specific
canine pancreatic lipase) test has become available. This
test is a newer generation immunological test for canine
pancreatic lipase and can be run overnight by a reference
lab. This test is able to detect 83 percent of pancreatitis
cases (the test is 83 percent sensitive) and excludes
other possible diseases in 98 percent of cases (i.e. the
test is 98 percent specific for pancreatitis). The CPL test
has been adapted into an in-house test kit and can be run
in approximately 30 minutes. Some kits provide a
numeric value while others are simply positive or
negative depending on whether the CPL level surpasses
the normal level. These kits have made diagnosis of
pancreatitis much more rapid and convenient.
A similar lipase assay called the DGGR Lipase Assay (Precision PSL® test). This test can
be run at a reference laboratory with results obtained usually overnight; there is no inhospital test kit.
The diagnosis of pancreatitis is not made solely on the basis of a lab test. These tests are
not used to screen patients that are not sick; the entire clinical picture of a given patient is
considered in making this or any other diagnosis.
Imaging
Radiographs can show a widening of the angle of
the duodenum against the stomach, which indicates
a swelling of the pancreas. Most veterinary
hospitals have the ability to take radiographs but
this type of imaging is not very sensitive in detecting
pancreatitis and only is able to find 24 percent of
cases.
Ultrasound, on the other hand, detects 68% of
cases and provides the opportunity to image other
organs and even easily collect fluid from the belly.
Since pancreatitis can be accompanied by a tumor
near the pancreas, ultrasound provides the
opportunity to catch such complicating factors.
In some cases, surgical exploration is the only way
to make the correct diagnosis.
Treatment
The most important feature of treatment is aggressively rehydrating the patient with
intravenous fluids as this restores the circulation to the pancreas and supports the natural
healing mechanisms of the body. This means that the best route to recovery involves
hospitalization. Fluids are continued until the patient is able to reliably drink and hold down
adequate fluid intake, a process that commonly takes the better part of a week. Pain and
nausea medication is needed to keep the patient comfortable, restore interest in food, and
prevent further dehydration.
Plasma transfusion is somewhat controversial in treating pancreatitis. On one hand,
plasma replenishes some of the natural blood proteins that are consumed by circulating
digestive enzymes and would seem to make sense. In humans with pancreatitis, however,
no benefit has been shown with plasma transfusion. Whether or not the protection

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 4/7
Drawing by Dr. Wendy Brooks
afforded by plasma is real or theoretical is still being worked out. Higher mortality has
been associated with patients receiving plasma, but this may be because they were sicker
than patients who did not receive plasma to begin with.
In the past, nutritional support was delayed in pancreatitis
patients as it was felt that stimulating the pancreas to
secrete enzymes would encourage on-going inflammation,
but this theory has been rethought. Currently, an earlier
return to feeding has been found to be beneficial to the GI
tract's ability to resume function. If nausea controls through
medication does not give the patient a reasonable appetite,
assisted feeding is started using a fat-restricted diet.
Return of food interest and resolution of vomiting/diarrhea
generally means the patient is ready to return to the home
setting. Low-fat diets are crucial to managing pancreatitis,
and their use should be continued for several weeks before
attempting to return to regular dog food. Some dogs can
never return to regular dog food and require prescription
low-fat foods indefinitely.
Pancreatitis is a highly inflammatory disease. Fever,
elevated white blood cell (WBC) count, and other signs of inflammation occur frequently in
patients with pancreatitis. Infection is rare in pancreatitis, but when it does happen, it can
lead to serious complications. Your veterinarian can help decide if antibiotics are needed,
but in most uncomplicated cases, they are not part of the treatment regimen.
Supportive care includes more than just intravenous fluids. Nausea medication, pain relief,
and possibly protecting the stomach from ulceration are all commonly included in the
treatment plan. The specifics will be individually tailored for each situation.
Panoquell-CA1® (fuzapladib sodium) is a new product released in 2023 for the treatment
of acute pancreatitis. It is given by IV injection for the first 3 days of hospitalization.
Heretofore, treatment has been "supportive," which means we make the patient
comfortable with symptomatic relief and support the circulation through the pancreas with
IV fluids until the pancreas can heal on its own. This new medication represents actual
treatment in that it prevents harmful white blood cells from entering the pancreas where
they would release their own inflammatory biochemicals. This treatment is meant to
actually stop the inflammation in the pancreas. It is used for acute/sudden severe cases
and not for ongoing milder cases.
How Much Fat is Okay?
There are several ultra-low fat diets made for pancreatitis patients, and your veterinarian
will likely be sending your dog home with one of them. Remember that pancreatitis is a
diet-sensitive disease so it is important not to feed unsanctioned foods, or you risk a
recurrence. If your dog will not eat one of the commercial therapeutic diets, you will either
need to home-cook or find another diet that is appropriately low in fat (less than 7 percent
fat on a dry matter basis). In order to determine the fat content of a pet food, some
calculation is needed to take into consideration how much moisture is in the food.
The Guaranteed Analysis on the bag or can of food will have two values that we are
interested in: the % moisture and the % crude fat. To determine the % fat in the food, you
must first determine the % dry matter of the food. This is done by subtracting the moisture
content from 100. For example, if the moisture content is 15%, the dry matter is 85%. If
the moisture content is 75%, the dry matter is 25%, and so on.
Next, take the % crude fat from the label and divide the % crude fat by the % dry matter.
For example, if the moisture content is 76%, this means the dry matter is 24%. If the crude
fat content is 4%, the true fat content is 4 divided by 24 which =0.16 (16%). Such a food

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 5/7
would be way too high in fat for a dog with pancreatitis. You want the number to be 0.07
(7%) or less. Simply reading the fat content off the label does not take into account the
moisture content of the food and will not tell you what you need to know. If this is too much
math, the staff at your vet's hospital can help you out.
When in doubt, canned chicken, fat-free cottage cheese and/or boiled white rice will work
in a pinch. Eventually, there will be a point where the tests will be repeated. At that point, it
will be determined if the patient has chronic pancreatitis and will need long-term dietary
modification or if the episode has concluded. The safest diet going forward will be
therapeutic low-fat diets used during the acute episode, but if you want to transition to a
conventional diet, this can be done. If you restart a regular diet, it is best to recheck
pancreatitis testing in a few weeks to be sure that there is no recurrence on the horizon.
Alternatively, a diet with a moderate fat restriction (15% by dry matter, as calculated
above) might make for a happy medium.
Beware of Diabetes Mellitus
When the inflammation subsides in the pancreas, some scarring is inevitable. When 80%
of the pancreas is damaged to the extent that insulin cannot be produced, diabetes
mellitus results. This may or may not be permanent, depending on the capacity of the
pancreas’ tissue to recover.
In Summary
Pancreatitis is inflammation of the pancreas. The pancreas secretes
digestive enzymes that break down nutrients.
If digestive enzymes are activated too early, they can digest the body itself
instead of food.
It can be painful and life threatening as well as acute or chronic, mild or
severe.
Signs include appetite loss, vomiting, diarrhea, painful abdomen, and fever.
Certain additional problems can occur, such as affecting the lung to the
point of respiratory failure.
In most cases the cause is unknown but these issues can contribute:
Backwash (reflux), hormonal imbalances, certain drugs, trauma, pancreatic
tumor, sudden high fat meal, or obesity.
Diagnosis is generally made with lab tests. Ultrasound is more useful than
radiographs. Sometimes surgery is the only way to diagnose it.
Treatment is rehydrating with IV fluids to restore the circulation, which
generally means being hospitalized for almost a week. Pain and antinausea medications are needed.
After release, your dog will need an ultra low-fat diet that your veterinarian
will provide.
When 80% of the pancreas is damaged and insulin cannot be produced,
diabetes results.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952412&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157496

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 6/7
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Pancreatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952412&ind=195&objTypeID=1007 7/7
Perianal fistulas in a German Shepherd. Photo by
MarVistaVet
Perianal Fistulae in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 28, 2025
Published: August 22, 2017
(Also called perineal fistulae, anorectal
abscesses, perianal fissures, perianal
sinuses, and pararectal fistulae.)
Most people are not in the habit of
inspecting the area under their dog’s tail
unless the dog seems to be doing
something that indicates a problem. Signs of
a problem might include licking under the
tail, scooting the rear end on the ground, or
seeming to be in pain when sitting or raising
the tail. When the tail is lifted and the anus
inspected, a dog with perianal fistulae will
show deep open crevices and some oozing
pus all around the anal sphincter. It may not
be possible to get a good look as pain may
preclude lifting the tail, but odor may be
noted, and the dog might be straining to defecate. There is also an association of perianal
fistulae with the mucous diarrhea of colitis, so that might be seen as well. Perianal fistulae
wax and wane but ultimately, over time, the condition is progressive, ulcerating the
surface of the anus and its surroundings.
What Causes this Condition?
At this time, no one knows, but recent information suggests an immune-mediated basis.
There also seems to be a genetic contribution as the German shepherd seems
predisposed to the development of this condition; however, this phenomenon may be
more about conformation than about a specific genetic factor for the disease.
While any breed can be affected, 85% of affected dogs are German Shepherd dogs. The
anal glands may or may not be involved in the fistulation, but there seems to be a clear
association with concurrent colitis (inflammation of the colon, as mentioned). Relative to
other breeds, the German shepherd dog has an increased number of apocrine sweat
glands, the type of sweat glands that produce unpleasant-smelling, oily sweat (as
opposed to watery sweat) in the anal area. The average age of onset is five years, and
approximately twice as many males are affected as females.
Approximately 85% of affected dogs are German Shepherd dogs.
What Else Could It Be?
Several conditions can produce ulcerative lesions around the anal sphincter. While
perianal fistulae have a typical history and appearance, it is important to get the right
diagnosis. Some conditions that might look similar include:

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Perianal Fistulae in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952922&ind=196&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Photo by Mary Buck
Squamous cell carcinoma of the anus (cancer)
Hyperplastic anus (common in older unneutered
male dogs)
Perianal adenoma (benign tumor also common
in older unneutered male dogs)
Anal sac rupture
Anal sac tumor
Mucocutaneous lupus
Treatment
This condition is an immune-mediated disease.
Treatment centers on suppressing the immune reaction
that is causing the problem, and this means
immunosuppressive drugs will be the centerpiece of
therapy. Realize from the beginning that, while
improvement is evident within a couple of weeks, it will take two to five months to get the
lesions fully under control and that maintenance therapy may be needed for the remainder
of the animal’s life. The good news is that control can usually be achieved and continued
with maintenance levels of medication.
Immune Suppression
Years ago, an assortment of surgical procedures were used to trim the diseased tissues of
the perineal fistulae, but immunomodulating drugs have largely supplanted surgery. In
particular, two medications have emerged: cyclosporine (an oral drug) and tacrolimus (a
topical drug). Many dogs will need both to control their disease at least at first, but often,
the topical product can be used alone once the pain has been controlled.
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine was originally developed for organ transplant patients to prevent organ
rejection by modulating the immune response without necessarily suppressing it. The
medication is given twice daily, and improvement should be seen within the first two
weeks of use. Cyclosporine is an expensive medication, and there is tremendous
controversy over whether or not generics are bioequivalent. Only microemulsion forms of
cyclosporine are effective, which usually means a brand-name veterinary product. Higherdose protocols seem to yield faster, more sustained results.
As mentioned, improvement is typically obvious within the first two weeks, though several
months are needed to resolve lesions. After the disease is controlled, cyclosporine may be
tapered off over another three to five months. Approximately 50% of dogs will not be able
to fully discontinue medications, and their symptoms will recur within two to 12 months if a
maintenance schedule is not implemented. This could involve tacrolimus (see below),
cyclosporine, or both.
Cyclosporine tissue levels can be boosted (and overall financial expense reduced) with
the concurrent use of ketoconazole, an antifungal drug.
This trick can be used to cut the dose of cyclosporine and save money. There is
controversy regarding whether blood levels of cyclosporine help determine the dose and
what the relationship is between tissue levels and blood levels. Because of the long-term
use needed to control perianal fistulae, it is best to monitor liver enzymes or liver function
tests in the patient; cyclosporine blood levels may or may not be recommended by your
doctor.
Tacrolimus
Tacrolimus is a much stronger immunomodulator than cyclosporine. Because it can be
applied directly to the fistulae, high tissue levels can be achieved right in the area where
they are needed. The potential for side effects and expense is also much more favorable

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Perianal Fistulae in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952922&ind=196&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Same anal area as shown above after
several months of cyclosporine
therapy. Photo by MarVistaVet
than that of cyclosporine, but only 50 percent of dogs
experienced resolution with tacrolimus alone after 16
weeks versus 85 percent with cyclosporine. In a perfect
world, both oral cyclosporine and topical tacrolimus are
used at the same time, but after the condition is controlled,
tacrolimus alone can be used to prevent recurrence. It is
important to wear gloves when applying tacrolimus as this
medication has been linked to an increased risk of cancer
in humans but not in dogs.
Other Options
Cyclosporine currently dominates treatment for this
condition, but it is an expensive drug, and it may not be
feasible to use it for months on end in a large-breed dog.
In this event, prednisolone has been used, but there are
undesirable side effects with high-dose steroid use
(extreme thirst, increased appetite, weight gain, panting,
muscle loss), and approximately 30 percent of dogs will
not respond.
Azathioprine is a stronger immunosuppressive drug. The
above side effects are not associated with its use, though
bone marrow suppression is possible, and some
monitoring tests are generally recommended. Because it
takes some time to exert its effects, it is commonly combined with prednisolone, at least at
first.
Approximately 50 percent of dogs were able to achieve remission with azathioprine in
combination with a limited-ingredient diet (see below).
Supportive Therapy Beyond Immune Suppression
Antibiotics
Since these lesions are commonly infected, at least at the beginning of treatment,
antibiotics are typically prescribed. A topical antibiotic may be helpful for long-term
infection control. However, it is important to realize that antibiotics alone will not control
this deeply rooted problem; they are merely adjunctive to controlling complicating
infections.
Stool Softeners
Because of the ulcerations, defecation may be painful. To minimize the straining, stool
softeners may be prescribed.
Novel Protein / Limited Ingredient Diet
Food allergy seems to be a possible etiology in this condition, so using foods that the
patient could not possibly be allergic to has been recommended as an adjunctive therapy.
Such diets are typically made from unusual protein sources such as rabbit, duck,
kangaroo, fish, or venison. Most veterinary hospitals stock appropriate food. It is important
to note that there is nothing especially hypoallergenic about these unusual proteins; the
idea is that the patient has likely never eaten them before. If the patient has never been
exposed to these proteins, there should be no possibility of allergy, as developing an
allergy requires multiple exposures to a protein. In one study, 50 percent of the dogs with
perianal fistulae also had colitis (colon inflammation and associated mucous diarrhea). If
this is not a coincidence, then the fistulae should respond to some of the treatments that
help colitis, and this would include a hypoallergenic diet.
Surgery: If Immune Suppression Fails

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Perianal Fistulae in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952922&ind=196&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Before we had cyclosporine, perianal fistulae were treated surgically with mixed results.
Presently, surgery is only recommended for patients for whom immunosuppression has
failed or where the anal glands are involved. The goal of surgery is to remove the
proliferative or dead tissue, prevent or treat any anal or rectal strictures (narrowed areas
caused by scarring), and change the “environment” of the perineal region. Tail amputation
may be required; in one study, tail amputation alone was 80 percent successful in
preventing recurrence.
If the anal glands are involved in the fistulae, they will have to be removed. In milder
cases, chemical cauterization of fistulae (which destroys abnormal tissue and allows
normal tissue to heal) may be helpful. Cryotherapy, where a freezing agent is used
instead of a chemical one, has been less effective (more scarring, less control over the
area treated, etc.) Laser therapy, on the other hand, has been 95 percent successful in
preventing recurrence and controlling pain (20 percent of patients developed fecal
incontinence, but most of these cases were controlled with diet).
The more extensive the surgery, the greater the potential for complications. Stool
softeners are typically needed for a month after surgery, and the owner should be
comfortable cleaning the anal area. Fecal incontinence, a narrowed anus, and inability to
control the fistulation are the chief complications with surgery.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952922&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157524
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:28 PM Perianal Fistulae in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952922&ind=196&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: March 31, 2021
Published: April 01, 2007
A portosystemic shunt (PSS, portasystemic shunt, portocaval shunt, portacaval shunt,
liver shunt, hepatic shunt, or porto-systemic vascular anomaly) happens when a pet’s
venous blood from the stomach, intestines, pancreas, and spleen bypasses the liver. The
pet can be born with the shunt (congenital) or can get it later (acquired). About 80% of the
cases are congenital, although sometimes a pet can have both types. About 25-33% of
the congenital shunts are within the liver. Approximately 0.18% of all dogs have congenital
shunting.
During pregnancy, the portal blood vessel in the fetus bypasses the liver (the mother’s
liver filters out toxins for the fetus). Normally this shunt closes within three days after birth.
In affected animals, the shunt doesn't close and the blood continues to bypass the liver.
Because the liver filters toxins, if it is bypassed the toxins build up in the body. This results
in the puppy or kitten having slow or nonexistent growth (failure to thrive). If left untreated,
puppies and kittens are not likely to survive.
Congenital shunts seem to happen more in purebreds than in mixed breeds. Breeds with
increased risk of PSS include Yorkshire terrier, Maltese terrier, Silky terrier, miniature
schnauzer, miniature and toy poodles, Lhasa apso, Bichon Frise, shih tzu, Havanese,
Dandie Dinmont terrier, Pekingese, German shepherd dog, golden retriever, Doberman
pinscher, Labrador retriever, Irish setter, Samoyed, Old English sheepdog, Irish
wolfhound, Australian shepherd, Australian cattle dog, Himalayan, and Persian.
No sex predisposition has been documented.
An acquired liver shunt is usually caused by liver problems (hepatic cirrhosis, portal
hypertension, hepatic arterio-venous malformations, etc.) that resulted in the body routing
blood through whatever blood vessels are available, even if it means bypassing the liver.
(It would be like taking side streets to your final destination, instead of using the interstate
highway.) As happens with congenital shunts, the liver can't filter what doesn't pass
through it, so toxins build up in the body.
Signs
Signs include stunted growth, not gaining weight, losing weight, vomiting, diarrhea,
lethargy, unresponsiveness, temporary blindness, seizures, spaciness (staring into
space), disorientation, circling, poor skin and coat, excessive drinking, excessive
urination, etc. Sometimes the pet will just act odd after eating, or pace around or press his
head against the wall. The signs you will see depend on the location of the shunt and how
many toxins have built up in the body. Some pets will only have one sign, while others
could have several. Many of the clinical signs associated with PSSs are related to hepatic
encephalopathy.
Diagnosis

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952622&ind=197&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Clinical signs, blood tests, urinalysis, and imaging tests (e.g., radiographs, ultrasound
images, portograms [an image of the blood vessels to the liver], or nuclear scintigraphy [a
nuclear scan that measures blood flow]) can be used for diagnosis. Blood bile acids are
elevated after a meal, so the before-meal and after-meal bile acid levels are compared.
Despite the variety of tests available, a confirmed diagnosis may not be available until
surgery is done.
Treatment
Some pets with liver shunts can do well with medical management. However, some of
those pets will eventually be euthanized when dealing with the neurologic problems
(hepatic encephalopathy) becomes too much for an owner to cope with. In some pets, a
change of diet can be enough to control the signs. Dietary suggestions (protein source,
protein levels, and protein amounts) can vary, depending on whether or not the pet has
hepatic encephalopathy. Medical management is more a matter of avoiding certain things
(diuretics, NSAIDs, barbiturates, infections, etc.).
Surgical repair of the shunt is common, particularly for congenital shunts, but it seems to
be more successful in dogs than in cats. Before surgery, the veterinarian will try to
stabilize your pet as much as possible. (Diet changes, antibiotics, lactulose, etc. may be
used. Every pet's needs will differ. Your veterinarian will determine what your pet may
need.) Post-operative antibiotics will usually also be given. After surgery, once the pet has
normal bile acid levels, he can usually return to a normal diet.
Monitoring
Medical management of hepatic encephalopathy (e.g. antibiotics, lactulose, diet) will be
continued for several weeks following surgery or until hepatic function improves.
(Previously, protein-restricted diets were recommended for hepatic encephalopathy
patients, but current research indicates feeding a highly digestible protein and small,
frequent meals throughout the day may be better. Soy-based protein may be a better
source than meat-based protein for dogs, but vegetable-based protein is not advised for
cats.)
Laboratory tests are usually re-evaluated one month after surgery to check for evidence of
improved liver function. Bile acids are usually re-evaluated three months after surgery. If
they are still abnormal, then medical therapy is continued. If bile acids are still elevated six
months after surgery, your veterinarian will re-evaluate your pet for persistent shunting.
Many dogs with repaired intrahepatic shunts can have persistently elevated serum bile
acids. Even with abnormal bile acid levels, the absence of clinical signs and the
normalization of other blood chemistry parameters are considered markers of a good
outcome.
Prognosis
How well the pet does with medical management or surgery depends on many factors,
such as where the shunt is located, if the pet has both acquired and congenital shunts,
etc.
Approximately 33% of patients with PSSs can be managed with medical therapy alone.
The older the animal is at the time of onset of clinical signs, the longer their survival with
medical management alone.
The overall success rate from surgery is about 85%. Complete surgical ligation of the
shunt has a good prognosis. A partial ligation will provide some level of improvement, but
will have a less positive long-term prognosis. Some animals will not respond to any
treatment, and will have to be euthanized.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952622&ind=197&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Treated cats don't do as well as treated dogs. Sometimes cats will still have neurologic
signs after surgery and may need continuing medical treatment. Some cats may respond
to a second surgery one month after the first one. Only a third of the cats who have the
shunt ligation surgery do well long term.
With dogs, the prognosis really depends on where the shunt is located.
Unfortunately, over half of the dogs who don't have surgery and are treated medically are
eventually euthanized, typically within 10 months of diagnosis. This is because of
neurologic difficulties or continued liver damage. Dogs that do best with long-term medical
management are usually older at the time of diagnosis and aren't as severely affected.
Surgery is usually, but not always, the best option for a normal life span.
Affected pets should never be bred because it is too much strain on the body and
because this condition runs in families.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952622&pid=19239
7826bd6d-55d3-48a9-8d62-f843f446e843.1754157547
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Portosystemic Shunt in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952622&ind=197&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Prophylactic Gastropexy in Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: January 31, 2024
Published: July 19, 2023
Commonly referred to as volvulus, bloat, gastric dilatation, or gastric dilatation and
volvulus (GDV), is an often fatal emergency that causes the dog’s stomach to distend and
twist.
Two main risk factors for GDV are anxiety and a dog's body shape. GDV can happen to
any breed of dog but tends to occur in deep, barrel-chested dogs such as Great Danes,
St. Bernards, greyhounds, German Shepherds, Weimaraners, boxers, etc. Great Danes
have the highest lifetime risk at about 40%.
When gas and food distend (stretch) the dog’s stomach to several times its normal size,
the dilated (distended) stomach usually rotates. We don’t know why it twists, but it can
rotate anywhere from 90° to 360° degrees (essentially from one-quarter of a circle to all
the way around). When it is twisted shut, it is like a balloon tied off with a knot: unless the
balloon pops, nothing is getting out. Whatever is in the stomach (food, water, gas) cannot
move into the intestines. The distended stomach crushes major blood vessels in the
abdomen.
Without treatment, a dog with GDV will experience significant pain and die within hours
(it’s not the same time frame for every dog). For those owners who choose not to go with
surgery to correct the GDV, the decision to euthanize must be made quickly because of
the pain the dog is experiencing.
Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV) is an emergency that requires surgery
and hospitalization or euthanasia.
What is Prophylactic Gastropexy?
An elective surgical procedure called prophylactic (or preventative) gastropexy (tacking)
prevents GDV. In deep-chested dogs or those whose adult weight is expected to reach
over 99 pounds (45 kg) this preventive surgery that permanently attaches (tacks) their
stomachs to the body wall is often done when a dog is being spayed or neutered, or
another surgery is taking place where the abdomen is being explored already.
Gastropexy can be done when the dog is six months or older. It also can be an elective
procedure on its own, or it can be done as part of treatment at the emergency room during
an episode of GDV.
Types of Prophylactic Gastropexy
Prophylactic gastropexy is performed by a veterinary surgeon. Two incisions are made in
the body wall, where the stomach is to be tacked, at the same spot from both the outside
and inside. Sutures attach the stomach to the body wall at this spot. The scar tissue
created from the two incisions will hold the stomach in place.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Prophylactic Gastropexy in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=11675887&ind=198&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Great Danes are one of the breeds susceptible
to bloat.
Laparoscopic and endoscopic gastropexies
are also possible and tend to heal faster
than the method described above, but they
require specialized equipment that may be
available only at specialty hospitals.
Laparoscopic gastropexy involves inserting
instruments and a camera through two small
incisions in the body wall. The endoscopic
approach inserts the instruments and a
camera through the mouth and esophagus
into the stomach and needs only one
incision.
The laparoscopic and endoscopic
procedures are less invasive and take less
time to heal (around two weeks), so they are
often used on working dogs such as police
or military dogs that need to be back in
action as quickly as possible. These
procedures also shorten the time the dog is
under anesthesia.
What Happens After Gastropexy
Surgery?
Excess gas can still be a problem, but
tacking significantly reduces the stomach’s
ability to twist. If the stomach becomes
distended, it’s unpleasant and painful but not
fatal. Unfortunately, the preventive procedure is not a complete guarantee that the dog will
never have a twisted stomach, but with gastropexy surgery, the possibility of twisting
drops to approximately 6%.
Elective vs. Emergency Prophylactic
Gastropexy - Aftercare and Outlook
Aftercare for preventive surgery is relatively simple.
Post-operative care is essentially the same as an
ovariohysterectomy (spay), and instructions will be
to keep the dog calm and leashed for seven days.
Do not let the dog jump or run, and keep the
incision dry.
A prophylactic gastropexy can be done in dogs
whose owners plan on doing competitive agility.
Some agility handlers have worried that the
strenuous activity of agility will break down the
tacking, but there have been no studies or patient
case reports that indicate that. Activity or breeding
will not make the tacked stomach any less effective.
Surgery in an emergency setting requires more
aftercare but depends on the dog’s case. Most patients will stay in the hospital for a few
days. Their diet might need to be changed along with the usual post-operative care.
In dogs with GDV, gastropexy reduces recurrence to less than 5%, while not doing one
results in recurrence rates as high as 80%.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Prophylactic Gastropexy in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=11675887&ind=198&objTypeID=1007 2/3
A risk vs. benefit study calculated the lifetime risk of bloat and its medical treatment. The
study found preventive surgery made sense for at-risk breeds, especially Great Danes.
If your dog is not a predisposed breed or mixed breed and does not have other risk factors
for GDV, you can discuss with your veterinarian if a prophylactic gastropexy is
advised/necessary. If you do have a large breed dog and/or other risk factors and have
concerns about bloat, talk with your veterinarian about the potential benefits and risks of
gastropexy to see if it is a good option for your dog.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11675887&pid=19239
e04d98fe-c412-4ceb-b31e-c38688c2e132.1754157569
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Prophylactic Gastropexy in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=11675887&ind=198&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Revised: October 09, 2024
Published: August 07, 2020
Rectal prolapse occurs when the rectum, which is the last part of the intestines, gets
turned inside out (everted) and sticks out of the anus. It looks like a red or pink tubular
structure sticking out of the area from which your pet normally poops. It can also be
crusty, ooze, bleed, or be a dark color if the prolapse has been present for a while. Rectal
prolapse is not the same thing as hemorrhoids, which are swollen veins from the rectum
that bulge out of the anus.
Why a Prolapse Happens
Prolapse can occur after a pet has been straining to poop for a while. Rectal prolapses
occur most frequently in young animals that are less than 4 months old, although it can
happen in any animal of any age. Some of the most common reasons a rectal prolapse
happens is if the pet has intestinal worms, is dehydrated, constipated, has diarrhea or
loose stool, has an intestinal blockage such as a tumor, or has eaten an object that he is
having trouble passing. Certain breeds are more likely to develop a prolapse, such as the
Manx cat and the Boston terrier. Over time, straining leads to weakening of the structures
that keep the rectum in place, causing the rectum to stick out through the anus.
Other Signs
If your pet has a rectal prolapse, you may also have noticed that he has been spending a
lot of time trying to poop recently. An example of straining is standing in the classic,
“hunched” posture, used for emptying the bowels, for longer than usual. It can also mean
pooping more times than usual, even if he can finish quickly. Some pets will lick or chew
the prolapse or the area surrounding the prolapse because it is itchy or painful. You may
also have seen an unusual change in the poop, such as being small and dry, looser than
usual, or covered in intestinal worms. If you haven’t noticed any change in regular habits,
either because keeping an eye on your pet’s bathroom habits is gross or because you
have a sneaky pet that hides to go, it isn’t a big deal. Your veterinarian will likely be able to
identify the condition and its cause during a check-up.
Diagnosing a Rectal Prolapse
To officially diagnose a rectal prolapse, your veterinarian will give a pretty thorough
physical examination, including a rectal exam in which they feel the prolapsed tissue. A
fecal sample will likely be taken to check for worms and other intestinal issues. If a
blockage is suspected, x-rays and/or an abdominal ultrasound may be necessary.
Treatment
To treat the prolapse, the vet will have to carefully clean the area before replacing the
prolapsed tissue back into its original position. If it is swollen, additional medications or
solutions may need to be applied to shrink the inflamed tissue in the prolapse. Sometimes
sedation or anesthesia is needed because a prolapse can be painful, especially if it
becomes infected.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9761112&ind=199&objTypeID=1007 1/2
If the prolapse can be replaced, the vet may tie a “purse-string” suture around the anus to
keep the opening small and prevent the rectum from prolapsing again. This fix is
temporary until your pet heals. The suture will need to be removed later (your vet will tell
you when), but it is important that you don’t let your pet chew the area or the suture may
break. Antibiotics, stool softeners, and pain medications may be sent home, as well as an
e-collar, to ensure the rectal tissue heals properly.
Occasionally, a rectal prolapse cannot be replaced, or the tissue is too damaged. In these
cases, surgery will be necessary to either remove the damaged tissue (called a resection
and anastomosis) or tack the rectum to the inner body wall from inside the abdomen
(called a colopexy).
In addition to treating the prolapse, your veterinarian will also want to treat the cause of
the prolapse (e.g., treat intestinal worms). Most pets improve and do not continue to have
issues once the rectal prolapse heals. If you have any questions or concerns about your
pet’s diagnosis and treatment, give your vet a call so they can guide you further.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9761112&pid=19239
e04d98fe-c412-4ceb-b31e-c38688c2e132.1754157593
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:29 PM Rectal Prolapse in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=9761112&ind=199&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Roger Gfeller, DVM, DACVECC; Michael Thomas, DVM; Isaac Mayo; The VIN Emergency Medicine
Consultants
Revised: April 06, 2020
Published: December 31, 1994
Straining is a frequent and sometimes exaggerated effort to have a bowel movement or to
urinate.
It is often difficult to tell if the pet is having trouble urinating or defecating. Most owners
think their pet is constipated when they first notice them straining. Straining produced by
constipation may be identical to straining produced by a blocked urethra, diarrhea, or an
inflamed colon. Therefore, treatment of an assumed cause of straining may be the
opposite of what is actually needed.
In cats, straining is often indicative of urinary tract inflammation. Cats sometimes develop
a condition called feline lower urinary tract disease in which the bladder becomes inflamed
due to an unknown cause. This can also sometimes be accompanied by tiny crystals in
their urine. When there are too many crystals, they can plug the urethra (the tube that
empties urine from the bladder) and prevent the bladder from emptying – this is a lifethreatening emergency! The bladder becomes distended and the pet strains to relieve
itself. Urethral obstructions are more common in male cats, while both males and females
can be afflicted with urinary tract inflammation. Without help, this pet may be in critical
condition within just a few hours. True urinary tract infections are actually quite rare in
male cats. Dogs may also have obstructed urinary tracts due to stones, tumors or
inflammation. Many other conditions can cause straining in cats and dogs: an enlarged
prostate gland; irritated bowels; cancer of the bladder or bowel; intestinal or bladder
polyps; and more. This is why the simple act of straining should not be assumed to have a
simple solution.
In either species, an obstruction of the urinary tract is a potentially life-threatening
emergency and warrants a trip to the veterinarian right away.
What to Do
Transport the pet to a veterinary facility for examination and diagnosis.
If the pet seems systemically ill, is vomiting or is in pain, a visit to the
emergency clinic is warranted.
What NOT to Do
Do not delay getting the pet examined.
Do not put pressure on the abdomen as you lift or carry the pet.
Do not administer medications unless instructed to by a veterinarian.

8/2/25, 11:30 PM Straining to Eliminate: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951341&ind=200&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Browse the complete Veterinary Partner First Aid collection.
Introduction: First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
Bandaging: First Aid
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Bleeding: First Aid
Bloat: First Aid
Burns: First Aid
Can't Breathe: First Aid
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Choking: First Aid
Dehydration: First Aid
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Difficult Birth: First Aid
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Electrocution: First Aid
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fever: First Aid
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
Hypothermia: First Aid
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Nosebleed: First Aid
Paralysis: First Aid
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Shock: First Aid
Snakebite: First Aid
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Sunburn: First Aid
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
Wounds: First Aid
Wrapping Up First Aid
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951341&pid=19239
e04d98fe-c412-4ceb-b31e-c38688c2e132.1754157618
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:30 PM Straining to Eliminate: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951341&ind=200&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:30 PM Straining to Eliminate: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4951341&ind=200&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Published: July 06, 2010
An umbilical hernia is a condition in which abdominal contents (fat, intestines, etc.)
protrude past the abdominal wall at the location where the umbilical cord was attached to
the fetus. Congenital umbilical hernias are more common in puppies than in kittens.
The umbilicus, or belly button, is where the umbilical cord attaches when the puppy or
kitten is in the womb. The umbilical cord carries nutrition and oxygen from the mother to
the fetus, and waste products and carbon dioxide from the fetus to the mother. Normally,
after the puppy or kitten is born, the cord breaks, and the connection at the umbilicus
closes up.
An umbilical hernia occurs when the hole doesn’t close correctly. When this happens, skin
is the only barrier between the abdominal organs and the environment.
Umbilical hernias are diagnosed on physical examination.
Small hernias do not usually cause any problems, and are often left untreated.
Large hernias should be repaired surgically, because there is a risk that the abdominal
contents inside the hernia sac could become damaged or strangulated. Strangulation of
intestinal loops can cause blood flow restriction to the intestine, intestinal blockage, etc.
Strangulated hernias can become life-threatening; signs can include a large, warm hernia
sac; vomiting; abdominal pain; lack of appetite; and depression. Radiography or
ultrasonography may be necessary to help diagnose a strangulated hernia.
As long as the hernia isn’t causing problems for the puppy/kitten, the herniorrhaphy
(hernioplasty, hernia repair surgery) can be delayed until the scheduled
ovariohysterectomy or neuter. However, if strangulation occurs, the surgery becomes an
emergency procedure.
The exact cause of congenital umbilical hernias is unknown, but it is generally thought to
be a hereditary condition.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952951&pid=19239
e04d98fe-c412-4ceb-b31e-c38688c2e132.1754157644
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:30 PM Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952951&ind=201&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:30 PM Umbilical Hernias in Puppies and Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952951&ind=201&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Vomiting or Regurgitation in Dogs and Cats?
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: December 19, 2019
Published: July 08, 2008
Vomiting is when the contents of the stomach and upper intestine are forcefully ejected;
regurgitation occurs when contents of the mouth, pharynx, or esophagus are expelled. For
example, dogs with megaesophagus regurgitate; the food comes back up from the
esophagus.
The most notable signs of vomiting are nausea and abdominal heaving. Pets that are
nauseated tend to drool and look apprehensive. Some dogs and cats may have
grumbling/growling stomach sounds (borborygmi).
Regurgitation is less involved. It’s more of a burp in which some of the contents in the
esophagus, either liquid or solid, come back up. Although there might be some gagging or
a bit of coughing as the contents move up, there’s no abdominal heaving involved.
Usually, the food brought up is undigested and is covered with mucus. Regurgitation
generally happens quite soon after the pet eats.
Basically, vomiting is an active effort, whereas regurgitation is pretty passive. See the
difference in the videos below.
This one shows vomiting:
This one shows regurgitation:

8/2/25, 11:31 PM Vomiting or Regurgitation in Dogs and Cats? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952781&ind=202&objTypeID=1007 1/2
It's not always easy to distinguish the product of vomiting from that of regurgitation, but
some things your veterinarian will consider are:
1. Heaving, retching, or abdominal compression doesn't occur with regurgitation,
but can with vomiting.
2. The regurgitated bolus (a lump of food the amount of a single swallow) is
usually tubular in shape.
3. The regurgitated bolus usually has a neutral or alkaline pH. If the food made it
to the stomach prior to being regurgitated, however, the pH may be acidic (as
vomited food would be). Your veterinarian may test the expelled material's pH
level.
4. A regurgitated bolus does not have bile in it. Vomited food may or may not
contain bile.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952781&pid=19239
e04d98fe-c412-4ceb-b31e-c38688c2e132.1754157668
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:31 PM Vomiting or Regurgitation in Dogs and Cats? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254092&id=4952781&ind=202&objTypeID=1007 2/2




