Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABT, DABVT
Revised: March 29, 2024
Published: August 05, 2014
Spot-on flea and tick products for dogs and cats have
greatly improved the safety and convenience of
controlling external parasites on our pets. Using pesticides that are many degrees less toxic and
frequently more effective than the organophosphate or carbamate dips and sprays of the past,
these spot-on products help keep our pets (and our homes) free of annoying pests that can also
carry serious diseases.
When used according to the label directions, spot-on products are well tolerated by most pets.
However, as with any product that is applied directly on the skin, there is the possibility that certain
individuals will have adverse local reactions to one or more ingredients in the product. Some
individuals will have similar reactions to many different spot-on products with different active
ingredients, suggesting that their sensitivities may be to some of the inactive ingredients. These
reactions are restricted to the area of skin that comes in direct contact with the product, so they do
not reflect a systemic toxicosis but rather a local hypersensitivity. Skin reactions to spot-on
products can vary from mild tingling sensations to actual chemical burns of the skin in especially
sensitive individuals.
Epidermal Paresthesia
The mildest form of skin reaction to spot-on products is epidermal paresthesia, which is defined as
an abnormal sensation such as an itch or prickling of the skin. Paresthesia occurs when the applied
product "tickles" the nerve endings in the skin, causing the characteristic sensation. Although
paresthesia may occur with any spot-on product, it is most commonly associated with products
containing concentrated pyrethroids such as permethrin, cyphenothrin, and etofenprox. Pyrethroid
paresthesia is a syndrome that has been well documented in both humans and animals. Human
descriptions of pyrethroid paresthesia vary from "tingling" to "pins and needles" to "burning"
sensations in the skin at the site of pyrethroid contact.
These sensations begin within 30 minutes of application and may last 8 to 24 hours if untreated.
Some pets appear to experience similar discomfort following application of spot-on products; the
fact that the products are generally applied between the shoulder blades can make the sensation
particularly annoying to the pets. Affected pets, cats in particular, may become hyperactive and
agitated as they try to walk away from the sensation; others may become quiet, subdued, and
reluctant to move. Skin at the product application site will appear normal (if redness is noted, you're
dealing with contact dermatitis, see below).
Fortunately, treating epidermal paresthesia is fairly simple and entails bathing off the product with a
mild dish soap (pet shampoos are too mild to remove all of the product). For pyrethroid
paresthesia, applying vitamin E to the affected skin can provide quick relief— just use scissors to
snip open a vitamin E capsule (the kind used as a vitamin supplement) and squeeze the oily
contents onto the pet's skin and rub it in.
Contact Dermatitis
A rare but more significant skin reaction (in terms of sensitivity) to spot-on products is contact
dermatitis, in which an inflammatory reaction develops in response to the topically applied product.
These responses - sometimes referred to as hypersensitivity reactions - can occur upon the first
use of a product, but more commonly occur after several uneventful exposures to the product. The
body sets up an inflammatory response to the site of application, and the skin will appear red and
irritated. In more severe cases, wheals or blisters may develop, and the skin may actually ulcerate.
Unlike paresthesia, which tends to occur within 30 minutes of application, oftentimes the onset of
contact dermatitis is delayed for several hours, with the full extent of the injury taking 12 to 24
hours to develop.
8/2/25, 10:04 PM Adverse Reactions to Spot-on Flea and Tick Products - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=6386334 1/2
Depending on the degree of the inflammatory reaction, the level of discomfort can range from mild
to quite severe. After bathing off the spot-on product, pets who develop more than mild redness at
the application site should be seen by their veterinarians for further treatment to reduce the
inflammation and discomfort.
The good news is that skin reactions to spot-on flea/tick control products are quite uncommon, and
most pets will have no problems when these products are used. Unfortunately, it is not possible to
predict which individual will react to a given product until the reaction has occurred. For this reason,
it is a good idea to observe your pet closely for at least an hour following the application of any
spot-on product for any signs of discomfort.
Although not life-threatening, skin reactions can range from mildly annoying to very painful; for this
reason, a pet that has reacted to a spot-on product should never have the same product applied in
the future. If a spot-on product is still desired for flea and/or tick control, try a product with different
active ingredients than the one that caused the reaction. Following application, watch the pet
carefully and be ready to bathe at the first sign of problems. Unfortunately, some individuals cannot
tolerate any of the topical spot-on products, and other flea control options, such as sprays or dips,
may be needed.
Serious Reactions
More serious problems can result when spot-on flea/tick products designed for dogs are
inappropriately applied to cats. Certain concentrated pyrethroids (e.g., permethrin) that are not
harmful to dogs can cause life-threatening tremors and/or seizures if applied to cats—these are not
really adverse events but are instead true poisonings since the product was misused.
Always read the label before using any topical flea/tick product on cats, and never apply
products intended for dogs onto cats. Frontline® (fipronil) is toxic to rabbits.
If your pet has a reaction to a flea or tick control product of any kind, you should report the reaction.
All spot-on product labels will have a phone number that you can use to report the reaction to the
manufacturer. By law, the manufacturer is required to send monthly reports of adverse reactions to
the appropriate federal regulating authority.
Alternatively, you can go to the agencies' websites to find out how to report reactions directly to
them. Report reactions to flea/tick products containing heartworm preventatives, such as
Revolution® and Advantage Multi®, to the Food and Drug Administration; report flea/tick products
that do not contain heartworm preventatives to the Environmental Protection Agency.
Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Published: October 13, 2021
Conjunctivitis is inflammation of the conjunctiva in the
eye. The conjunctiva is a pinkish mucous-secreting
membrane, similar to the lining of your mouth and nose, that covers the eyeball and lines the inner
surface of the eyelids. The conjunctiva also covers the third eyelid, or nictitating membrane, that
dogs and cats have but you do not. Inflammation, as indicated by the suffix ‘-itis’, is tissue that is
red, warm, swollen, and usually painful as a result of disease or injury.
In conjunctivitis those membranes become red and swollen. Dogs and cats with conjunctivitis
normally have cloudy, yellow, or greenish discharge from the eyes; a lot of blinking or squinting;
and redness and swelling around the eye. Green or yellow discharge often indicates a bacterial
infection; clear or whitish discharge is more likely to be caused by allergies or a bit of debris in the
eye. Usually both eyes are affected, but not always. Sometimes other signs are seen, such as
itching, hairlessness around the eye, discharge from the nose, sneezing, or coughing.
What we normally call “pink eye” in people is a type of conjunctivitis. The condition can be caused
by several reasons, such as bacteria, herpes virus or allergies.
Any breed of dog or cat may develop allergic conjunctivitis. All breeds predisposed to atopic
dermatitis, a hypersensitivity or over-reaction to a variety of commonplace and otherwise harmless
substances like pollen, are also predisposed to allergic conjunctivitis. Allergic conjunctivitis is most
common in young adults but can occur at any age.
In this allergic condition, the following are frequent contributors:
Allergies
Atopy (genetic tendency towards allergies)
Dust
Food allergy
House dust, molds
Treatment
Allergic conjunctivitis is most commonly treated with eyedrops or ointments containing
corticosteroids, such as dexamethasone or hydrocortisone. Your veterinarian may check first for a
scratch on the cornea (called a corneal ulcer) by instilling a yellow dye called fluorescein. If the eye
has a scratch, medication without steroids is used, as steroids can delay healing of the scratch.
Oral corticosteroids and/or antihistamines may also be helpful, especially in those pets with
associated skin disease. Over-the-counter topical antihistamines may be beneficial, particularly in
itchy dogs, but ask your veterinarian which one is best for your pet’s situation. However, topical
mast cell stabilizers and antihistamines have variable clinical results.
A sterile saline eye wash can be used once or twice a day to clean the eyes and remove the
accumulated discharge. Saline may also reduce surface irritation by flushing dirt, dust, debris, and
pollens away from the eye.
Preventing damage to the eye is important as pets with allergic conjunctivitis may scratch at their
eye with their paws or rub their face on furniture. This rubbing can lead to a corneal ulcer and
associated pain and damage to the eye. Using an Elizabethan collar to prevent scratching may be
part of the treatment plan from your veterinarian. This is especially important in short-faced breeds
like pugs and shih-tzus, who are particularly prone to eye injuries. A recheck examination may be
recommended by your veterinarian after treatment. If signs have not improved, your veterinarian
may suggest sending your pet to a veterinary dermatologist or ophthalmologist for a work-up or
recommending allergen testing to try and determine what your pet is allergic to. This step is usually
reserved for dogs or cats with severe allergies.
8/2/25, 10:05 PM Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=10517463&ind=5&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Prevention
Allergic conjunctivitis is caused by allergies, so the best way to prevent it from happening again is
to remove whatever your pet is allergic to from your home, if possible. Even if you can figure out
what allergen they are reacting to and remove it or deal with it, you may not be able to eliminate it.
If dust is found to be a cause, keep household dust to a minimum, and consider using an air purifier
to filter out dust.
Allergic skin testing or food trials may be needed to find out the cause of the inflammation. In those
cases, you may be able to determine if your dog or cat is reacting to something like dust or an
ingredient in their food.
In many cases, allergic conjunctivitis can’t be cured, but with the help of your veterinarian (and
perhaps a few steps taken around the house) it can be managed and you can make your pet more
comfortable.
8/2/25, 10:05 PM Allergic Conjunctivitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=10517463&ind=5&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Address your pet's excessive itching promptly to prevent
discomfort and complications.
Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: December 15, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Atopy
Atopy is defined as the genetic tendency to develop allergic diseases. These diseases are
due to a heightened immune response to common substances in the environment, known
as allergens.
In atopic dermatitis, allergens, including pollens, molds, dust particles, etc. make their way
to the skin and then gain entry through a defective skin barrier. Inhaling is not necessarily
involved. The immune system becomes reactive to the airborne allergens and soon the
inflammation, itching, and scratching begins. Even if the allergens come from the air, the
itch is felt in the skin, leading to scratching, hair loss, redness, and skin thickening.
Allergens (pollen, dander, etc.) are
harmless to someone who is not allergic
to them. Atopic dermatitis has a genetic
basis.
Breeds predisposed to develop atopy
include Dalmatian, Golden retriever, West
Highland white terrier, Shar Pei, Labrador
retriever, Cairn terrier, Lhasa Apso, Shih Tzu,
Boxer, and Pug.
Features of Atopy in Dogs
There are many reasons for pets to itch:
parasites, allergy to flea bites, food allergy, secondary infection, and the list goes on.
The following are findings from the patient's history and examination that might lead to a
diagnosis of atopy. In fact, meeting five criteria from this list yields an 85 percent accuracy
for the diagnosis of atopic dermatitis, at least for dogs:
Young Age of Onset
Seasonal itchiness due to atopy tends to begin early in a pet's life (between
ages 1 and 3 years in 70 percent of dogs diagnosed with atopy). Food allergy
tends to begin later (more like age 5 or 6 years in dogs) or earlier (less than 6
months of age). The age at which itching first manifests is not as reliable a sign
in cats as in dogs.
Mostly Indoor Lifestyle
It is indoors where many airborne allergens are concentrated. It is important to
note that allergens in the air are present for miles, so it is not easy to escape

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 1/6
allergens by simply going outdoors.
Good Response to Steroids
Whether the patient is a dog or cat, itchiness due to atopy responds rapidly to
cortisone-type medications (prednisone, betamethasone, dexamethasone, etc.)
as does itching due to insect bite allergy. Food allergy is more variable in its
response; it may or may not respond well.
Chronic or Recurring Yeast Infections in the Skin
Yeast (Malassezia pachydermatis) live on the surface of the skin normally but
with all the changes allergy causes to the skin's microenvironment, yeast will
proliferate and create a stinky, thickened, pigmented skin that resembles
elephant skin or even tree bark. Environmental allergy is a strong predisposing
factor in developing yeast dermatitis.
Front Feet Involved
Whether it is chewing the top of the feet or between the toes, foot licking is a
classic feature of atopic dermatitis.
Ear Flaps Involved
The non-haired (inside) portion of the ear flap (the concave pinna) is commonly
involved in atopic dermatitis regardless of whether the inflammation extends
down the ear canal and leads to what we usually think of as an ear infection.
The concave pinnae becomes greasy, red, thickened, smelly, or any
combination of the above.
Ear Margins Not Involved
Ear margin involvement is suggestive of sarcoptic mange and would lead one
away from airborne allergies.
Lower Back Area Not Involved
The lower back is the flea bite zone. There are few conditions other than flea
bite allergy that cause itching in this area, so if this area is involved, make sure
flea control is achieved before further evaluating the skin.
Seasonality
Seasonality of the itching is also a clue towards an airborne-related allergy, but
since there are many climates where seasons are ambiguous, this is not
necessarily a hard and fast feature of atopic dermatitis. It should also be noted
that while skin testing and blood testing are used to make immunotherapy sera
to treat atopic dermatitis, reactions and positive results on these tests do not
contribute to making a diagnosis of atopic dermatitis. Many normal animals will
have positive results. These tests are for animals where the diagnosis of atopic
dermatitis has already been made based on the above criteria as well as ruling
out other itchy diseases.
Testing for Atopic Dermatitis
Unlike other diseases where a test of some sort can be performed, atopic diagnosis is a
clinical diagnosis, which means the diagnosis is made based on symptoms and findings
such as those listed above. Allergy testing, which is done either by skin test or by blood

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Non-lesional fur mowing. Photo by
MarVistaVet
testing, is not a test for atopic dermatitis; instead, this type of testing is done after the
diagnosis has been confidently made based on findings in the patient. Allergy testing is
conducted to determine how best to make an allergy shot serum for a specific patient; it is
not part of disease diagnosis.
In cats, the irritation pattern is not as characteristic. There are four common
manifestations of atopy. Unfortunately, these same irritation patterns can be found in
numerous other skin conditions and, in fact, up to 25 percent of atopic cats have multiple
types of allergies.
Treatment Options
Many people are frustrated because treating atopic
dermatitis focuses on controlling the symptoms.
Unfortunately, finding out what a pet is allergic to is not
entirely possible and even when it is, because pollens
and other material circulate in the air for miles, you
can't just avoid allergens in the air. Only
hypersensitization treatment stands a chance at
actually changing the patient's immune system so that
they are no longer allergic, but this is far from a sure
thing. The good news is that at the end of the day, the
goal is healthy comfortable skin and there is a lot that
can be done towards achieving this. How big a project
this becomes depends on an individual patient's ability
to respond to different therapies or combinations of
them. Here are some of the options.
Clearing Secondary Infections
Before doing anything else, it is important to clear up secondary infections. Secondary
infections involve bacteria (usually Staphylococcal) and/or yeast (Malassezia) at the site
of the itchiest areas on the body. These organisms live naturally in the skin but when the
skin is irritated, they gain access to inner tissue layers and proliferate. Sometimes they
generate further allergic response in the skin. These infections tend to recur and are the
usual cause of recurrence of itch symptoms in a patient who was previously controlled.
Hyposensitization (Allergen Specific Immunotherapy)
Hyposensitization, more commonly known as allergy shots, is by far the treatment of
choice for atopic dermatitis. All the other medications are basically just itch relief; only
hyposensitization actually changes the immune system. Some dogs are eventually able to
go off all treatments and are no longer allergic after they have been on hyposensitization
long enough. Most dogs experience at least enough improvement to require fewer
additional treatments but there are some caveats before making an appointment for
allergy testing.
Allergy shots require approximately 6 to 12 months to begin working.
25% of atopic dogs will not respond (these are usually the animals allergic to
multiple allergens).
25% will require prednisone or a similar steroid at least at some times.
You will most likely have to give the allergy shots yourself.
Referral to a veterinary dermatologist may be necessary.
In hyposensitization, the patient is injected with small amounts of allergens on a regular
basis. As time passes, the amounts of allergens increase and injections are given at
longer intervals. The selection of allergens is made based on the results of either an

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Intradermal Skin Test
Reactive blebs. Photo by Dr. Mitch Song.
intradermal skin test (as described above), an in vitro test (a blood test) or a combination
of the results of both tests. The younger the pet is when this treatment starts, the better it
works.
Steroid Hormones
These cortisone-type medications
(prednisone, prednisolone, triamcinolone,
dexamethasone, etc.) have been useful as
the first line of defense against itchy skin
for decades, and they are still widely used.
There are negative side effects with higher
doses as well as with long-term use, so the
trend is to use other medications to either
remove the need for steroids or reduce the
amount needed for itch control.
Side effects include:
Excess thirst
Excess hunger
Excess urination, which could lead
to house-breaking issues
Suppression of the immune
system/bringing out latent infection,
especially urinary tract infection and upper respiratory infection.
Raising blood sugar/destabilizing a borderline diabetic (especially a problem for
cats if long-acting injectable steroids are used). In the short term, side effects
can be controlled by adjusting dosage but in the long term, these medications
are more problematic and if possible their use should be minimized.
Steroid hormones are useful for acute flare-ups as well as for long-term management of
atopic dermatitis (assuming limits are placed on how long they are used). Side effects are
greatly minimized when steroids are used topically.
Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine is a modulator of the immune response that has been helpful in both human
and non-human organ transplant patients. It has been found to be reliably effective in
atopic dermatitis and does not carry the unpleasant side effect profile that steroids do.
That said, it is not without side effects of its own. It is used mostly in dogs but can also be
used in cats. It is for long-term management and is not helpful for acute flare up control.
Oclacitinib (Apoquel)
This is a new medication best used for itching relief and blocking itch symptoms. Apoquel
is popular as it works fast. It does not address the inflammation in the skin; it just stops the
itch sensation. This means that any skin infection causing the itch will still need to be
controlled.
Canine Atopic Dermatitis Immunotherapeutic (Cytopoint®) Injections
This is a new treatment that uses vaccine technology to eliminate one of the main
mediators of itch sensation. The injections provide relief from itching for one month in 80%
of dogs (many dogs get longer relief) and usually show effectiveness within 24 hours.
Bathing the pet weekly to remove allergens from the fur may be helpful in
reducing allergen exposure, plus tepid water is soothing to itchy skin. There are

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 4/6
also many therapeutic moisturizing shampoos that can be used to restore the
skin’s natural barrier or to assist in general itch relief.
Avoid stuffed toys, wash bedding regularly. This minimizes dust mite exposure.
Also, remove the pet from the area when vacuuming or dusting.
Use air-conditioning and/or an air filter system.
Keep the pet away from the lawn while it is being mowed.
Minimize houseplants.
Omega 3 Fatty Acid Supplements
These products are not analogous to adding dietary oil to the pet's food, such as olive oil,
coconut oil, corn oil, etc. Instead, these special fatty acids act as medications, disrupting
the production of inflammatory chemicals within the skin. By using these supplements, it
may be possible to postpone the need for steroids/cortisones or reduce the dose of
steroids needed to control symptoms. It takes a good 6 weeks to build up enough omega3 fatty acids in the body to see a difference.
Ultra-Microsized Palmitoylethenolamide or PEA (Redonyl®)
Plants and animals make a natural substance called PEA. In animals, it helps restore
balance to the skin's biochemistry and prevents the release of the biochemical causes of
itching. The commercial product uses a soybean extract to obtain its PEA and creates a
super concentrate as it would not be possible to eat enough soybeans to get a therapeutic
dose of PEA. The super small ultra-micronizing allows it to be absorbed better. It is
available as a flavored chew for dogs and can also be used in cats.
Antihistamines
Antihistamines have been popular for many years for pets, and it seems their
effectiveness does not stand up to scrutiny. They provide neither short-term relief nor
reliable long-term relief. They may be helpful in combination with other products in that
their use may reduce the need for other products. They may work better in cats than in
dogs.
Solid Flea Control
Allergies are additive. This means that when a patient has multiple allergies, each allergy
alone may not be enough to cause itching but the allergies all active together probably
will. Consequently, taking away one of the active allergies may be enough to allergy
reduction to resolve the itching. Flea bite allergy is extremely common. We now have so
many effective products available that there is no reason for an animal to contend with a
flea bite allergy. This simple bit of therapy (flea control) may be enough to bring the pet
below her itch threshold without having to contend with any of the therapies listed above.
Itchy skin has been the scourge of dogs, cats, and their owners for decades if not
centuries. We are now armed with a great understanding of immunology and have many
tools to address allergy symptoms. Your veterinarian can guide you further with regard to
a proper regimen. If your veterinarian decides treatment is not working as well as hoped,
discuss whether or not a referral to a veterinary dermatologist is in your pet’s best interest.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951475&pid=19239
5945d631-92b8-4bb7-ac7f-e62e00a31f37.1754152593
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 5/6
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:06 PM Allergies: Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951475&ind=6&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Anaphylactic Shock in Pets
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: February 25, 2025
When a human or pet comes in contact with a
substance that their immune system thinks is
harmful, the immune system labels that substance
an allergen and produces antibodies to fight it. The
resulting response is an allergic reaction.
Depending on the allergen and your pet’s immune
system, the respiratory tract, gastrointestinal tract,
or skin may be affected. If severe enough, the
response can create an anaphylactic reaction (also
called anaphylaxis or anaphylactic shock), which
involves significant damage to multiple organ
systems at once.
Anaphylactic reactions can also occur as non-immune-mediated reactions (reactions that
are not triggered by the immune system), but veterinary scientists don’t fully understand
why this happens.
As with humans, not all animals react the same to all substances, and it can't be predicted
if or why an animal will react. Different species of animals may react differently, too. For
instance, a substance triggering anaphylactic shock in a dog may not bother a cat or a
horse at all.
What Triggers Anaphylactic Shock?
Any substance can cause anaphylaxis. Most commonly, foods, insect/arachnid stings or
bites, snake bites, certain medications, and vaccines can trigger anaphylaxis. Nonimmune-mediated anaphylactic reactions can occur with heavy exercise, extreme
temperatures, and certain medications.
In many cases, the first time an animal is exposed to an allergen that will cause
anaphylaxis, they won’t have an obvious reaction. The second time they are exposed, and
pretty much every time after that, they can develop life-threatening signs of anaphylaxis.
Pets don’t tend to outgrow allergens like people do, so once a pet experiences
anaphylaxis toward a substance, it will happen every time they get re-exposed, even
many years later.
Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency.
Signs of Anaphylaxis
An anaphylactic reaction is a sudden, severe, potentially life-threatening reaction
and must be addressed immediately. It usually occurs within a few minutes of exposure.
Some pets collapse after exposure and can’t be roused. Others may show signs of

8/2/25, 10:08 PM Anaphylactic Shock in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=12528857&ind=7&objTypeID=1007 1/3
restlessness, with progression to skin redness, hives, itching, and facial swelling. Vomiting
or throwing up and loose stools can also occur. Severely affected animals may have
difficulty breathing, show evidence of internal or external bleeding (bruising, nose bleeds,
swelling of the belly), or they may develop seizures.
Signs of anaphylaxis can happen very fast, and some pets die before they make it to a
veterinarian for treatment. If a substance causes an allergic reaction that compromises
your pet’s ability to breathe, this is an emergency, and it is not time to wait and see how
serious the reaction becomes. Breathing difficulties can worsen rapidly, and time is not a
friend.
Can You Tell if Anaphylaxis Is Happening?
Sometimes, the cause of an anaphylactic reaction is obvious, such as an encounter with a
snake. The area around the injury may swell, and bite marks may be seen. Venomous
spider or insect bites or stings might swell with no visible signs of an injury. However,
anaphylaxis isn’t always triggered by something obvious like envenomation. Let the
veterinarian know of any recent changes in diet, medications, vaccines administered, or
illnesses (e.g., heartworm or parasite infection).
In some cases, you may never know what caused the reaction. If your pet struggles to
breathe, you see an obvious swelling, and/or your pet is showing other signs of
anaphylaxis, don’t waste time trying to figure out what happened. Take your pet to the
veterinarian.
Treatment
Your veterinarian will treat this as the emergency it is.
Try to stay calm if the clinic staff rushes your pet to “the back” without a lot of explanation.
They will assess your pet’s condition and respond appropriately. Treatment may include IV
fluids, oxygen therapy, and administration of epinephrine. Other drugs may be given
depending on your pet’s condition, such as antihistamines, steroids, bronchodilators to
help open the airways, and pain or anti-nausea medications. In extreme cases,
cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), intubation, and/or blood transfusions may be
needed. If there is a wound from a sting or bite, the staff will address it and administer
pain medication or antibiotics if appropriate.
Blood work, blood pressure, vital signs, and other monitoring tests will be performed
regularly until your veterinarian feels your pet is out of danger. Your pet will likely stay in
the hospital for observation at least overnight. When released, your veterinarian will give
you instructions on what to watch for at home, if anything, and advise you about continued
monitoring.
Prognosis and Prevention
In otherwise healthy pets and with prompt medical attention, recovery potential is fair to
good. Long-term effects of anaphylaxis are uncommon, although sometimes kidney
disease can occur. If the cause of anaphylaxis is identified, be sure to avoid it for the
remainder of your pet’s life. If re-exposed, seek veterinary medical care immediately, even
if your pet is not showing signs yet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=12528857&pid=19239
5945d631-92b8-4bb7-ac7f-e62e00a31f37.1754152642
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:08 PM Anaphylactic Shock in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=12528857&ind=7&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:08 PM Anaphylactic Shock in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=12528857&ind=7&objTypeID=1007 3/3
This White West Highland terrier has a
classic case of atopic dermatitis. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil
Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Revised: April 07, 2025
Published: September 15, 2003
Atopic dermatitis in dogs (allergic dermatitis, canine
atopy) is a hypersensitivity or overreaction to a variety
of commonplace and otherwise harmless substances in
the environment. These allergens include plant pollens,
house dust mites, or mold spores. Most allergic dogs
begin to show signs between one and three years of
age. Several dog breeds seem predisposed to allergies.
These dog breeds include Golden Retrievers, Labrador
Retrievers, West Highland White Terriers and other
terriers, and Bulldogs. However, any dog, including
mixed-breed dogs, can have atopic dermatitis.
Signs
Atopic dogs will scratch, chew, lick, or rub areas of the
body such as the paws, face, and rear end. This itchy
behavior, or pruritus, can cause hair loss and reddening
and thickening of the skin. Parasites, such as fleas and
bacterial or yeast infections, can then further increase
the itch level of allergic dogs. Atopic dogs can also have
ear and anal gland problems.
Diagnosis
Once your pet’s veterinarian has diagnosed the cause of your dog’s itching, allergy tests
can be used to identify what a pet is allergic to in the environment. There are two types of
allergy tests: the intradermal allergy test and blood testing for allergies (serologic allergy
testing). In an intradermal allergy test, the fur is clipped on one side of the chest, and
small amounts of common allergens are injected into the skin. The skin is then observed
for a reaction to the allergen. In a blood allergy test, a blood sample is obtained and sent
to a laboratory. At the laboratory, the protein levels (antibodies) to the allergens are
measured.
Each allergy test has its advantages and disadvantages. Most veterinary dermatologists
recommend intradermal allergy testing. This is because many factors, including which
laboratory is performing the test, can affect the results of blood allergy testing. However,
intradermal allergy testing has the disadvantage of needing to be done by a specialist and
usually requires a mild sedative to relax the dog during the test.
Treatment
If your dog is diagnosed with atopic dermatitis, there are three methods of therapy.
Avoiding allergens: It is usually not possible to remove all allergens from a pet's
environment because even a small amount can trigger a dog’s allergies.

8/2/25, 10:08 PM Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951973&ind=8&objTypeID=1007 1/2
However, bathing can help remove allergens from the skin. A hypoallergenic
cream rinse or spray can re-moisturize the skin after bathing.
Medications: A variety of anti-allergy drugs are available. These drugs include
antihistamines, steroids (cortisone), cyclosporine, oclacitinib and lokivetmab.
Some dogs develop side effects from taking certain anti-itch medications, such
as steroids. Different anti-allergy medications may need to be tried because not
every medication works for all pets.
Allergen-specific immunotherapy: Immunotherapy involves giving a series of
diluted allergens based on what your dog is allergic to. Allergen-specific
immunotherapy makes dogs less sensitive to their allergens, and 60-80% of
patients improve on immunotherapy. However, improvement in immunotherapy
takes time, and it is important to try the immunotherapy for several months
before it can take effect. When helpful, immunotherapy is usually continued lifelong but can be given less frequently over time.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951973&pid=19239
5945d631-92b8-4bb7-ac7f-e62e00a31f37.1754152713
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:08 PM Atopic Dermatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951973&ind=8&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Chest radiograph from a cat with chylothorax. The "white out" is
fluid (chyle) filling up the chest cavity. On a radiograph, any fluid in
the chest will look white. When the fluid is withdrawn and inspected
directly, the fluid may be any number of colors. As it happens, chyle
actually is white. Image courtesy MarVistaVet.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 25, 2023
Published: October 21, 2006
First, the Basics
Let us consider the chest cavity for a
moment. The chest can also be
called the thorax and the chest cavity
is sometimes called the thoracic
cavity. The thorax houses the lungs
and heart as well as some other
structures such as nerves, large
blood vessels, and other conduits
(such as the esophagus transporting
food through the chest and into the
stomach on the abdominal side of the
diaphragm) but the main residents of
the chest are the heart and lungs.
The lungs are the focus of this topic.
The diaphragm and rib muscles
extend and contract to draw breath
into the lungs and expel it again. In
many ways, the lungs are like
sponges filled with air. Life depends
on the ability of their small chambers to expand with new air and contract to expel used
air. There is not a lot of extra room inside the chest cavity, so when something (such as
fluid) starts taking up space in the chest, the lungs do not have room to inflate to their
natural capacity. Breathing becomes hard work, and the patient’s focus becomes
expanding the lung against limited space, sort of like trying to blow up a balloon that is too
stiff. The fluid inside the chest cavity is called "pleural effusion." This fluid is not actually
inside the lungs and generally does not lead to coughing or sputtering; it instead
surrounds the lungs, making lung expansion difficult, leading to shallow rapid breaths and
recruitment of the abdominal muscles to lend strength to the act of breathing.
Types of Fluids
There are many types of fluids that can accumulate in the chest cavity. When the fluid is
blood, the problem is called hemothorax. When the fluid is pus, the problem is called
pyothorax. When the fluid is actually air, the problem is pneumothorax. When the fluid is
lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. With chylothorax, the fluid is milky when it is
drained from the chest, and its whiteness is from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific
problem and requires specific therapy.
Initial Tests

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952543&ind=9&objTypeID=1007 1/4
The effort the patient is making to breathe will probably be the first sign of trouble, and
upon seeing this, your veterinarian is likely to recommend radiographs. On those, fluid in
the chest will be obvious. From there, the chest will need to be tapped with a needle and
the fluid drained. This will create some relief for the patient as the lung will once again be
able to expand. The fluid will most likely need to be sent to the lab for testing to determine
the type. If the patient is too distressed for radiographs, the chest may be immediately
tapped to see if there is fluid pressure that can be relieved. After the fluid has been
removed from the chest, new radiographs are often taken to see if there are any
structures (such as masses or heart chamber enlargements) that have become visible
now that the overlying fluid is gone.
What is Lymph?
Part of the circulatory path of lymphatic fluid involves certain lymph vessels of the GI tract
called lacteals, which are involved in the absorption of dietary fat. Because of this influx of
fat, lymphatic fluid is milky white. Lymphatic fluid/chyle contains fat, water, and
lymphocytes (cells of the immune system). We all know what blood is. We all know that
blood circulates in veins and arteries and is moved by the pumping action of the heart. In
fact, there is another circulatory system in the body: the lymphatic system. Lymphatic fluid,
also called "lymph" or "chyle," represents extra fluid draining between the cells of the
body, gradually channeling into lymph vessels. The fluid is moved in these vessels by the
natural movement of the body's muscles, and on its way, it picks up assorted cellular
debris and carries it along its route like driftwood. Lymph fluid (and its cellular driftwood)
circulates through the lymph nodes, where cells of the immune system are exposed to the
driftwood. In this way, the immune system sees the remnants of infection, tumor cells,
foreign organisms, etc., and can react appropriately. Some immune cells circulate in the
lymphatic fluid, facilitating the immune reaction and participating in the body's defense.
When something goes wrong with the circulation of the lymph fluid and back pressure is
created, lymph fluid can leak out and accumulate in the chest.
When the Diagnosis is Chylothorax
If there is a reason for the chyle build-up, it is important to find that reason. Often
(especially in cats), the reason is heart disease. Heart disease generally interferes with
lymphatic drainage, and poor drainage leads to chyle build up, but there can be other
reasons for chyle buildup besides heart disease. Any sort of mass or growth in the chest
could also be responsible. If a cause can be found, then it should be addressed if
possible. If no cause can be found, then the condition is termed idiopathic and is simply
managed either medically or surgically. An echocardiogram/ultrasound of the chest is
almost always needed to rule out chest masses and assess the patient for heart disease.
Most cases of chylothorax are idiopathic.
Breeds that seem predisposed include Siamese and Himalayan cats, and Afghan hound
and Shiba Inu dogs.
Cats are diagnosed with chylothorax approximately four times as often as dogs.
When the Diagnosis is Idiopathic Chylothorax
There are several options for treatment, though they have pros and cons. The most
conservative method is medical management. This means that whenever the patient
seems to be having some distress, the chest fluid is drained (see video of a fluid drain).
How often this is necessary is highly individual, but every few weeks is a common interval.
In time, after many taps, scarring can build up to cause the fluid to loculate, which means
that small pockets of fluid form rather than one drainable area. This makes tapping more
difficult over time. Other problems with periodic tapping are the potential to introduce an

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952543&ind=9&objTypeID=1007 2/4
infection with the needle stick and the fact that chyle is an inflammatory fluid that can, over
a long time, create some problematic scarring between the chest wall and the lung. This is
called restrictive or fibrosing pleuritis and is definitely something to avoid (see below).
A supplement called rutin may help. Rutin is available in vitamin stores and acts to
stimulate cells called macrophages to carry away some of the fat in the chyle. In some
individuals, this supplement is helpful in reducing the amount of chyle build-up.
Another treatment involves somatostatin, a chemical normally produced in the brain to
regulate intestinal hormone and enzyme secretion. One of its effects is to reduce chyle
flow through the thoracic duct. A commercial product can be used in pets, but its use
should be considered somewhat experimental.
A low-fat diet (approximately 6 percent fat on a dry matter basis) is generally also used in
conjunction with the above. Medical management such as this is often recommended
before surgery, as some cases of chylothorax will spontaneously resolve.
Treatment
In many cases, the cause of chylothorax cannot be defined. In this situation, chylothorax
is said to be idiopathic, and it must be treated without the benefit of treating its underlying
cause. There are several options for treatment, though they have pros and cons. The
most conservative method is medical management. This means that whenever the patient
seems to be having some distress, the chest fluid is drained. How often this is necessary
is highly individual, but every few weeks is a common interval. In time, after many taps,
scarring can build up to cause the fluid to loculate, which means that small pockets of fluid
form rather than one drainable area. This makes tapping more difficult over time.
A supplement that may help is called rutin. Rutin is available in vitamin stores and acts to
stimulate cells called macrophages to carry away some of the fat in the chyle. In some
individuals, this supplement is helpful in reducing the amount of chyle build-up.
A low-fat diet (approximately 6% fat on a dry matter basis) is generally also used in
conjunction with the above. Medical management such as this is often recommended
before surgery, as some cases of chylothorax will spontaneously resolve.
More permanent solutions require surgery.
Thoracic Duct Ligation and Pericardiectomy
The thoracic duct is the largest lymph vessel in the body, and it runs alongside the aorta
(the largest artery in the body) through the chest. Lymph fluid flows through it on the way
to the subclavian artery, where it dumps into the bloodstream. When the thoracic duct is
tied off, lymph fluid must find other channels for circulation, and the flow of lymph through
the chest is greatly reduced. Ligation (tying off) of the thoracic duct resolves the
chylothorax in approximately 50% of dogs and less than 40% of cats. See a video
of thoracic duct ligation in a cat.
Success is hugely increased by stripping the pericardium from around the heart.
The pericardium is the fibrous sac containing the heart. When it is bathed in chyle, it
becomes thickened and may slightly constrict the low-pressure right side of the heart. This
causes increased pressure on the right side of the heart, which in turn causes increased
pressure in the lymphatics. Stripping the pericardium relieves this pressure, and when
thoracic duct ligation is combined with pericardiectomy, chylothorax resolved in 100% (10
out of 10) dogs studied and in 80% of cats studied. This is now the surgery of choice for
chylothorax in cats and dogs.
Cisterna Chyle Ablation

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952543&ind=9&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The cisterna chyle is a structure where lymph collects just before it flows into the thoracic
duct. The removal or destruction of the cisterna chyle further diverts lymph flow away from
the chest. This procedure is generally reserved for patients who did not find success with
thoracic duct ligation/pericardiectomy.
Complications
It can take up to 50 days to realize the benefits of surgery for chylothorax. Some animals
simply will not achieve adequate resolution, and some (as many as 30% of dogs) will
resolve their chylothorax only to develop some other type of chest fluid. The simple use of
prednisone as an anti-inflammatory measure can resolve such fluid in as many as 60% of
dogs, though it takes four to six weeks. If this is ineffective or a more rapid solution is
needed, a port can be surgically placed under the skin to allow for easy fluid drainage, or
a pump can similarly be placed to allow the owner to pump fluid from the chest into the
abdomen.
Beware of Fibrosing Pleuritis
Chyle in the chest is irritating to the local tissue; the lungs can develop scarring from being
in contact with chyle. Scarring prevents the lungs from expanding normally even after the
chyle is removed. The only treatment is to surgically remove the scar tissue using a
procedure called decortication, a process fraught with complications if the lungs are
diffusely affected. If both lungs must be decorticated, it is common for life-threatening
pulmonary edema to occur as the lungs try to re-expand. Sometimes, air leaks out of the
lungs and fills the chest with air (pneumothorax). Before opting for any surgical treatment
of idiopathic chylothorax, this potential complicating factor should be discussed with the
surgeon.
Surgical treatment of chylothorax is something that not all veterinarians are comfortable
performing. Discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would be best
for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952543&pid=19239
5945d631-92b8-4bb7-ac7f-e62e00a31f37.1754152750
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952543&ind=9&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Discoid Lupus on a Nose
Photo courtesy of MarVistaVet.
Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 08, 2024
Published: January 15, 2007
(Also called DLE, Nasal Solar Dermatitis, or
Collie Nose)
Lupus – What is this Disease?
Lupus is an immune-mediated disease
stemming from your own immune system
reacting against your own DNA. This in
itself sounds like a recipe for disaster since
almost every cell in a body has DNA in it,
but it is important to remember that under
normal circumstances, your DNA is
sequestered in a cell nucleus where the
antibodies of the immune system cannot
reach it. The immune system in lupus does
not attack every cell in the body to get to its
DNA; instead, the immune system only
sees DNA after cells have died and their
assorted broken parts are floating around as debris. The immune system reacts to this
loose DNA and generates antibodies. These antibodies:DNA complexes deposit in
delicate membranes, such as the kidney filtration membranes, blood vessel linings, joint
capsules, and other similar structures. Once caught in these membranes, other
immunologic cells are attracted, and further inflammatory damage results.
Systemic lupus (SLE) involves this kind of inflammatory disruption (called a Type III
hypersensitivity reaction), and the prognosis depends on which organ systems are
affected and how severe the damage is. The disease is not curable but is manageable
with immuno-suppressive drugs.
The name “lupus” stems from archaic times when the disease was thought to have been
caused by the bite of a wolf.
Systemic Lupus Versus Discoid Lupus
When people use the term lupus, they are referring to systemic lupus, or SLE as
described above. Discoid lupus is a form of lupus that is confined to the skin and is
substantially more benign because of this confinement. Discoid lupus, or DLE, is almost
exclusively a canine disease and is almost always limited to the leather of the nose, called
the nasal planum.
Features of Discoid Lupus (DLE)
The immune system in lupus does not attack every cell in the body to get to its DNA;
instead, it only sees DNA after cells have died and their assorted broken parts are floating
around as debris.

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952581&ind=10&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Illustration by Tamara Rees
Discoid Lupus on a Nose
Photo courtesy Dr. Carol Foil
DLE does not progress to SLE.
Lesions of DLE are almost always
limited to the nose, though they can
extend up the bridge of the nose and
sometimes affect the ears or inside the
mouth. Early signs of the condition start
with the loss of nose pigment. A black
nose will become bluish-grey or even
pink. Scaling and cracking of the skin
result, and eventually, the nose will
ulcerate. Exposure to sunshine makes
the condition worse, and there seems to
be a genetic predisposition among the
collie breeds (hence the term collie
nose).
There are several other conditions that
also cause crusts and/or erosions on
the nose, so it is important to get the
right diagnosis. Some other conditions
to rule out include:
Dermatophytosis (ringworm of
the nose)
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
(Staph infection on the bridge of
the nose - see later)
Pemphigus foliaceus (a different
immune-mediated skin disease)
Hyperkeratosis (a callusing
disease of the nose)
Nasal lymphoma (a type of
cancer)
VKH-like syndrome (another
immune-mediated disease)
Diagnosis is by biopsy, which means a
small piece of nose tissue must be
harvested and sent to the laboratory for
analysis. Most dogs will not hold still for this
kind of procedure on their nose, so
sedation is generally needed to get proper
samples.
Expect stitches afterward; some mild
bleeding is possible. Diagnosis also
involves some important historical
information such as whether other body
areas are involved, whether the condition is
constant or comes and goes, and what
medications have helped in the past. The pathologist will consider all of this information
along with the microscopic appearance of the tissue.

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952581&ind=10&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Discoid Lupus on a nose
Photo Courtesy Marvistavet Graphics
Because mucocutaneous pyoderma looks just like discoid lupus, even under the
microscope, some steps are likely to be needed to distinguish the two conditions. A good
month of antibiotics generally resolves mucocutaneous pyoderma, so it may be necessary
to culture the nose and obtain an antibiotic profile with this plan in mind. Culture could be
done in conjunction with biopsy or prior, depending on how infected the nose appears.
Discoid lupus will not respond to antibiotics and will need immune suppression, hopefully
topically but possibly orally.
Therapy Choices
Discoid lupus is a condition with many treatment
options depending on the severity of symptoms.
Avoid Strong Sunlight
Since this condition is made worse by the sun, it is
important to avoid intense sunlight. Sunscreens
have been advocated but it is important to realize
that there are toxic ingredients in many human
sunscreens and anything you apply to a dog’s nose
will be licked off. Pet sunscreens are expected to be
licked. Various products for sun protection for your
pet do exist: ask your veterinarian for any
recommendations they may have.
Topical Corticosteroids
The immune-suppressive effects of steroids are
helpful in DLE but the systemic side effects are
undesirable. Side effects are minimized by using
topical steroids, typically starting twice a day and
eventually dropping to an as-needed basis for
maintenance after the nose is healed.
Tetracycline/Niacinamide
Tetracycline is an antibiotic with immunomodulating properties separate from its antibiotic
properties. Niacinamide (also called nicotinamide) is a B vitamin supplement related to
niacin (vitamin B3). The combination of these two medications has been found effective in
70% of dogs with DLE, though it can take up to two months to see an effect. Treatment is
given three times daily, which is relatively inconvenient for most people, so alternatives
have been sought. Doxycycline can be used twice a day and is frequently substituted for
tetracycline as tetracycline is very difficult to obtain.
Prednisone/Prednisolone
Oral steroids are often used to get the condition under control relatively quickly (within a
month) and can be used after that as the sole therapy after the lowest effective
maintenance dose is determined. Side effects include panting, excessive thirst and
urination, and increased appetite. None of these effects are particularly desirable, so often
steroids are used in conjunction with one of the other therapies with the idea of dropping
back the steroids when the second therapy can take over.
Oral Cyclosporine
Cyclosporine is an immunomodulator that has found extensive use in veterinary medicine
for a number of immune-mediated conditions, including allergies. It can be used to control
DLE but has some potential for side effects (mostly upset stomach) that might not be
worthwhile for milder cases.
0.1% Tacrolimus (Protopic®)
This is a topical immunomodulator made for human use. It is very effective for use in DLE
and does not cause problems if licked. Only small amounts of ointment are needed, and

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952581&ind=10&objTypeID=1007 3/4
the tube should last a long time, which is good news since it is not inexpensive. The
person applying the medication should wear gloves to avoid unneeded exposure.
If your dog is diagnosed with discoid lupus, discuss therapy options with your
veterinarian. If your dog has a crusty or ulcerated nose, expect a biopsy to be
needed to sort out the diagnosis properly before treatment can be prescribed.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952581&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152779
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:09 PM Discoid Lupus Erythematosus (DLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952581&ind=10&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Photo courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil
Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Revised: February 05, 2020
Published: October 23, 2015
House dust mites (Dermatophagoides farinae,
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus) are bugs that are in every
home, and some pets are allergic to them. Because these
mites are very small, they cannot be seen without a
microscope. House dust mites eat the skin scales and dander
shed by humans and animals. They are most commonly found
in the sleeping areas of people and pets. House dust mites
also like to live in homes with high humidity.
A house dust mite allergy is NOT a sign of a dirty house.
Homes with carpeting and areas with high humidity will always
have some dust mites.
The following are some ideas that can be used to reduce the amount of house dust mites
in your home.
House dust mites are most numerous in mattresses and beds. If possible,
please keep the pet off of your bed. If this is not possible, use plastic mattress
covers or some impermeable barrier for your pet's sleeping area on the bed
and wash and heat-dry bed linens weekly. Replace bedspreads, pillows and
mattress covers regularly.
Feather pillows are full of house dust mites and should not be used around
your allergic pet.
Pet beds should be covered in plastic, filled with cedar, or treated with
insecticides inside the cover. Covers should be washed weekly and the pet
beds should be aired out or put in the dryer. You should replace all pet beds
every six months unless the whole bed, including the stuffing, can be laundered
weekly.
When possible, choose décor and furnishings that either do not retain dust or
can be easily cleaned such as: closed bookshelves instead of open shelves,
washable curtains instead of blinds and heavy draperies, furniture with simple
designs instead of ornately curved pieces, wooden or plastic furniture instead
of upholstery, and easily cleaned decorations instead of dried flowers or straw.
Any upholstered furniture that is used by your pet should be covered with a
plastic throw cloth (anti-bed-wetting mattress pads can be useful).

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951977&ind=11&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Stuffed pet toys should be replaced with new ones that can be laundered and
dried weekly.
Vacuum and dust your pet’s environment frequently. Try to clean when the
dust-sensitive pet is not at home as vacuuming and dusting stir up the
allergens and increase exposure to them.
Use air conditioning or central heat to keep household humidity low. Change or
clean filters on air conditioning or heating systems on a regular basis. Do not
confine your pet to the laundry room, bathroom, utility room, basement or other
high humidity parts of the home.
Regular use of pet flea control products is associated with lower levels of house
dust mites in the home. If your pet has house dust mite allergies, we
recommend that all pets in your household be kept on year-round monthly flea
control.
Large amounts of house dust mites can live in carpeting. If possible, remove
the carpeting in your home or keep your pet out of carpeted rooms. If your
home must contain carpeting:
Area rugs that can be thrown into the washing machine and heat-dried
once a week are preferable.
Sprays that breakdown the house dust mite particles that cause allergies
are available but it is uncertain how effective these sprays are.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951977&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152811
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Dust Mites: Minimizing Exposure in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951977&ind=11&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Canine Food
Allergy Lesions
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Graphic by Mar
VistaVet
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 26, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Your Pet's Itchy Skin
Itchy skin in dogs and cats is often more than just a minor
annoyance. Red, oozing bald patches, rashes, and large expanses
of hair loss are unfortunate markers of very real discomfort. The
cause should be determined.
Food allergy is one of the itchiest conditions for cats and dogs.
Animals eat a variety of processed food proteins, flavorings, and
colorings that are further processed inside their bodies. Proteins
may be combined or changed into substances recognized by the
immune system as foreign invaders to be attacked. The resulting
inflammation may target the GI tract or other organ systems, but in dogs
and cats, the skin is frequently included in this immunologic activity.
Cats itch around the face or neck, which produces scabs and hair loss. In
dogs, signs include facial itching, foot or limb chewing, itchy anal area, and
recurrent ear infections.
Many people erroneously assume itching due to food allergy requires a
recent diet change of some sort. In fact, the opposite is true.
Food allergies require time to develop; most animals have been eating the
offending food for years with no trouble.
  
What Kind of Allergy?
Diagnosing and treating allergic skin disease and its secondary infections make up a large
proportion of cases seen in small animal practice. Pets can be allergic to insect bites
(fleas are not inherently itchy unless the pet is allergic to flea bites), airborne proteins
(such as molds, pollens, and dust mite parts), or foods. Pets can and often do have
multiple allergies, adding together to make them itchy. The skin infections that come from
scratching perpetuate the itching. To solve the problem, the infection must be cleared up
and the offending allergen(s) removed from the pet's world.
There is controversy about how common food allergy is in dogs and cats. Some experts
feel it is relatively rare, while others feel is much more common than we realize. It is hard
to tell because there is no simple test for food allergy, and the skin lesion distribution is
difficult to distinguish from that of airborne allergy, which is frequently concurrent in the
same patient.
So what are our clues that a pet has a food allergy? There are several hints:

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951526&ind=12&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Courtesy Dr. Cathy Wilkie
The itching is not seasonal (this is hard to tell in areas that do not freeze during
winter).
Itching started when the pet was less than six months of age or greater than
five to six years of age.
No response to treatment for sarcoptic mange (a condition with a similar itchy
skin pattern).
Corticosteroids have not helped manage the itching. Corticosteroids may or
may not work on food allergy itching but they almost always work for other
allergies.
There are accompanying intestinal signs like vomiting or diarrhea. These are
seen in 30 percent of food allergic pets.
The lesion distribution is compatible with food allergy, especially if an itchy anal
area and/or recurrent ear infections are involved.
Any of the above findings or observations warrant the pursuit of food allergy.
Please note that several of the above criteria relate to what you observe at home. Trouble
results when the veterinarian must speak to different family members about the pet and
there is disagreement in their observations. It is best to have one person, preferably the
one who has the most contact with the pet, be the spokesperson and make the relevant
judgments.
The Flea Factor
Some animals have many allergies. It would not
be particularly unusual for a pet to have a food
allergy and another type of allergy at the same
time.
Ensure immaculate flea control for any itchy pet!
For more information on the current proliferation
of flea products, see a product comparison chart
so you can pick the best product for your
situation. Remember, all dogs and cats in the
home must be treated.
What about Blood/Hair/Saliva Tests for Food
Allergy?
The short answer is not to waste money on these
tests. Blood tests for allergy can detect
antibodies against certain food proteins, but this
does not necessarily mean the pet has an allergy. It may mean nothing more than the pet
has eaten that type of protein before. Furthermore, the pet's body may alter a food protein
during digestion, and it is the altered protein that generates the allergy. There is no
predicting how a protein could be altered and thus no test can be devised for altered
proteins. Laboratory tests are simply not valid for determining if a pet has an allergy to a
certain type of food.
Hypoallergenic Diet Trial
To determine whether or not a food allergy or intolerance is causing the skin problem, a
hypoallergenic diet is fed for a set period. If the pet recovers, the original diet is fed for up
to two weeks to see if itching resumes. (Actually, exposure to an allergen generally leads
to itching within 12 hours, but it takes two weeks to be completely sure.)

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951526&ind=12&objTypeID=1007 2/5
If we see recovery with the test diet and itch with the original diet, then food allergy is
diagnosed, and the pet is returned to either the test diet or another appropriate
commercial food indefinitely.
There is no other way to determine if a pet has a food allergy. Blood tests are not useful.
Before reviewing diet strategies for this process, here are some additional concerns:
The diet must be strict (meaning the pet should not have any other protein
sources besides the test protein). This includes rawhides and chew toys,
flavored chewable medications (these will need to be changed for unflavored
tablets) and vitamins, and treats.
All family members must be on board with the trial. No one should be giving the
pet other foods or treats when no one else is looking.
It is probably best for all animals in the house to be fed the test protein so as
not to have food-sharing issues.
Itching must be managed during the trial in a way that the results of the trial are
not foiled.
Diet trials often span a season change period. If a dog has a pollen allergy and
winter comes during the period of the diet trial, it may appear that the diet
worked when, in fact, the seasons simply changed. This is why a diet challenge
is important at the end, even if the pet is doing well.
The diet trial will take eight weeks. Most animals will respond in three to four
weeks, but to be sure, you will need to feed the test diet for two months.
What Is a Good Hypoallergenic Diet?
There are two approaches to test diets: novel protein and hydrolyzed protein. Traditionally,
a novel protein is used. This is a diet with a single protein source that the patient has
never eaten before. It typically takes years to become allergic to a food protein so the
patient should not be allergic to something new.
Fortunately, many pet food companies have discerned the need for diets using unusual
protein and carbohydrate sources with a minimum of additives. Foods can be obtained
based on venison and potato, fish and potato, egg and rice, duck and pea, and even
kangaroo. Diets used for allergy trials must contain one protein and one carbohydrate
source, and neither can be something the pet has had before. Recently, several diets that
include duck, venison, and so on have been released to the general market. Be aware of
foods that contain these ingredients because these ingredients will not be useable for
future diet trials if they are ever used in the pet's regular food.
It is important that no unnecessary medications are given during the diet trial. No edible
chew toys (such as rawhides or bones) should be given. Treats must be based on the
same food sources as the test diet. (Beware of rice cakes, though, as wheat is commonly
used as a filler.) Chewable heartworm preventives should be replaced with tablets or
topicals.
Over-the-Counter Food? Therapeutic Diet? Home Cooked?
Recently several pet food companies have released single protein diets for over-thecounter sales. These tend to cost less than the therapeutic diets available from your
veterinarian's office directly. While these diets are attractive, they are probably not a good
choice for an actual diet trial. Immunological tests on these foods found that many of them
contain additional proteins (probable contaminants from prior batches in the pet food
factory). These impurities could defeat a diet trial which is hard enough to perform without
such issues. The therapeutic diets did not have these contaminants.

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951526&ind=12&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Home cooking is a fine alternative to commercially prepared foods for the diet trial. The
problem is that the test diets will most likely not be balanced but for the 2 months or so of
testing, this should not be a problem. Home cooking is a bit of an inconvenience, but for
the right person, it is a good choice. Ideally, a nutritionist should be involved in designing
the diet. Recipes for appropriate diets can be purchased through BalanceIt,
Petdiets.com or by any nutritionist listed at the American College of Veterinary Nutrition
website.
The Hydrolyzed Protein Method
Several therapeutic diets are made from hydrolyzed proteins. This means that a
conventional protein source is used but the protein is broken down into molecules too
small to excite the immune system. There are various hydrolyzed diets on the market;
discuss with your veterinarian which is best for your pet.
Trial Diet Timeframe
Studies have shown that 80 percent of dogs will have shown a response by 4 to 6 weeks
on the diet, but by extending the diet to 8 weeks, 90 percent will respond. The Labrador
retriever and cocker spaniel appear to require longer trials. Most veterinary dermatologists
recommend 8 to 12 weeks, which is a long time to be strict on the diet, but that is the only
way to detect food allergic dogs.
Most commercial diets used in food allergy trials have a
100 percent guarantee. This means that if your pet
doesn’t like the food, the food can be returned for a
complete refund, even if the bag is opened. This is
especially helpful for feline patients, as cats are famous
for being choosy about what they are willing to eat.
What To Do if the Diet Is Successful?
To confirm food allergy, return to the original food; itching
generally resumes within 14 days if food allergy was truly
the reason for the itchy skin. Many people do not want to
take a chance of returning to itching if the patient is doing well; it is not unreasonable to
simply stay with the test diet if the pet remains free of symptoms. Often it is difficult to
remember 10 to 12 weeks later how itchy the dog used to be before the diet trial. The diet
challenge helps make it more obvious whether the diet trial has worked or not.
It is possible to more specifically determine the identity of the offending foods after the pet
is well. To do this, a pure protein source (such as cooked chicken, tofu, wheat flour, or any
other single food) is added to the test diet with each feeding. If the pet begins to itch
within two weeks, then that protein source represents one of the pet's allergens. Return to
the test diet until the itching stops, and try another pure protein source. If no itching results
after two weeks of feeding a test protein, the pet is not allergic to this protein.
What To Do if the Diet Is Unsuccessful?
Assuming secondary skin infections have been controlled, an unsuccessful food trial is
strongly suggestive that an inhalant allergy is a primary problem, but some other
considerations should at least be mentioned:
Are you certain that the dog received no other food or substances orally during
the trial?
Was sarcoptic mange ruled out?
Your pet may require a longer diet trial. Are you certain regarding the factor that
pointed toward the food allergy?

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951526&ind=12&objTypeID=1007 4/5
If your pet has not been biopsied, now may be a good time. If an inhalant allergy has risen
to the top of the list, symptomatic relief either via medication, baths with specific
shampoos, or allergy shots will likely be necessary. Chronic itchiness can be extremely
uncomfortable and prompt relief is our goal as well as yours.
Information on itch relief.
Information on inhalant allergy.
Information on sarcoptic mange.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951526&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152839
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:10 PM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951526&ind=12&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Red blood cells are coated with Y-shaped antibodies that mark them
for removal or destruction. Illustration by Dr. Wendy Brooks
Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and
Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 31, 2023
Published: March 04, 2003
See the article summary below.
(Formerly known as autoimmune hemolytic anemia or AIHA)
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is a condition in which the body’s immune
system attacks and removes its own red blood cells, leading to severe anemia, an
unhealthy yellowing of the tissues called jaundice or icterus, and an assortment of lifethreatening complications. Mortality approaches 70%, so an aggressive approach is
necessary. Treatment includes immune-suppressive drugs and possible blood
transfusions.
How Red Blood Cells are Normally
Removed from the Body
Red blood cells have a natural life
span from the time they are
released from the bone marrow to
the end of their oxygen-carrying
days when they become too stiff to
move through the body’s narrow
capillaries. A red blood cell must be supple and flexible to participate in oxygen delivery
and carbon dioxide removal, so when the cell is no longer functional the body destroys it
and recycles its components.
When old red blood cells circulate through the spleen, liver, and bone marrow, they are
plucked from circulation and destroyed in a process called extravascular hemolysis. Their
iron is sent to the liver for recycling in the form of a yellow pigment called bilirubin. The
proteins inside the cell are broken down into amino acids and used for any number of
things (burning as fuel, building new proteins, etc.)
The spleen uses immunological cues on the surface of red blood cells to determine which
cells should be plucked out of circulation. In this way, red cells parasitized by infectious
organisms are also removed from circulation along with the geriatric red cells.
Alternatively, some old stiff red blood cells simply burst when they cannot go through
narrow passages. In that case (intravascular hemolysis), the components are scavenged
and recycled similarly.
When the immune system marks too many cells for removal, serious problems begin.
Too many red blood cells are removed and the patient becomes weak from lack
of blood.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 1/9
Dogs and cats may have darkly pigmented gums,
as shown here. Note the pale lip (mucous
membrane color) that can happen with this type of
anemia as shown above. The gums and lips may
also take on a yellow tint. If you notice this at
home, contact a veterinarian right away.
The liver is overwhelmed by the large amounts of bilirubin it must process. The
patient becomes jaundiced, or icteric, which means his tissues become yellow
or orange. The extra bilirubin in the urine turns the urine orange or even brown.
Hemoglobin (oxygen-carrying protein from inside the red blood cell) floats
around in the bloodstream in large amounts which can damage the kidneys.
All those red blood cells coated with antibodies begin to stick to each other and
form small clots (embolisms). This begins to block blood vessels, compromising
circulation to the organs and creating inflammation as the body tries to dissolve
the clots.
This is a life-threatening cascade of events and a 20-80% mortality rate (depending on the
study) has been reported with this disease.
What Happens During IMHA?
The spleen enlarges as it finds itself processing
far more damaged red blood cells than it
normally does. The liver is overwhelmed by large
amounts of bilirubin and the patient becomes
jaundiced (icteric), which means his tissues
become a yellow/orange color.
Making matters worse, a protein system called
the complement system is activated by these
anti-red cell antibodies. Complement proteins
can simply rupture red blood cells if they are
adequately coated with antibodies, a process
called intravascular hemolysis. Ultimately, there
aren’t enough red blood cells left circulating to
bring adequate oxygen to the tissues and
remove waste gases. A life-threatening crisis
has emerged; in fact, 20-80% mortality
(depending on the study) has been reported with
this disease.
Clinical Findings and Test Results
There are several features to IMHA that your veterinarian will be looking for, though not
every patient will show them all. To diagnose IMHA, there must be at least one sign of red
cell destruction (orange urine, yellow tissues, high bilirubin blood test, for example) plus
at least two indicators that the red cell destruction is immune-mediated and not from some
other cause (such as zinc toxicity). Indicators of immune-mediated red cell destruction
include a positive auto-agglutination test, a positive Coombs test, or the presence of cells
called "spherocytes" (see below).
Signs To Watch For
Your pet will be obviously weak. They have no energy and have lost interest in food. Urine
is dark orange or maybe even brown. The gums are pale or even yellow-tinged as are the
whites of the eyes. There may be a fever. You (hopefully) brought your pet to the
veterinarian’s office as soon as it was clear that there was something wrong.
To Review:
Spherocytes
Spherocytes are special red blood cells produced when red blood cells are not completely
removed by the spleen. The spleen cell bites off only a portion of the red cell, leaving the
rest to escape back to the circulation.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 2/9
A normal red blood cell is concave on both sides and shaped like a disc. It is slightly paler
in the middle than on its rim. After a portion has been bitten off, it re-shapes into a more
spherical shape with a denser red color. The presence of spherocytes indicates that red
blood cells are being destroyed.
Autoagglutination
In severe cases of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia, the immune destruction of red
cells is so blatant that the red cells clump together (because their antibody coatings stick
together) when a drop of blood is placed on a microscope slide. Imagine a drop of blood
forming not a red spot but a yellow spot with small red clumps inside it. This finding is
especially foreboding.
The spontaneous clumping of red blood cells is called autoagglutination.
The formation of an actual clot from all the clumping is called embolization
(especially if the clot travels in the circulation).
When the embolism lodges in a small vessel like a plug and occludes
circulation, this event is called thrombosis.
The condition where embolism is happening and vessels are being plugged is
called thromboembolic disease and it is the main cause of death in IMHA
patients.
Leukemoid Reaction
Classically, in IMHA the stimulation of the bone marrow is so strong that even the white
blood cell lines (which have little to do with this disease but which also are born and
incubate in the bone marrow alongside the red blood cells) are stimulated. This leads to
white blood cell counts that are spectacularly high.
Additional Helpful Tests
Coomb’s Test Called a Direct Antibody Test)
If a patient is anemic, icteric, or has spherocytes (or worse, autoagglutination) on a blood
smear, it is pretty obvious that there is immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Sometimes,
though, it is not so obvious and additional testing is needed. This is exactly where a
Coomb's test could be used.
This is a test designed to identify antibodies coating red blood cell surfaces. If there is
ambiguity in the patient's presentation, the Coomb's test might be selected to confirm that
the anemia is really immune-mediated and not the result of a bleed or non-immune
mediated origin such as zinc toxicity, or onion/garlic toxicity.
The Coomb's test has been around for a long time and is not perfect. It can give a false
positive in the presence of inflammation or infections (which might lead to harmless
attachment of antibodies to red cell surfaces) or in the event of prior blood transfusion
(ultimately transfused red cells are removed from the immune system). Despite its
limitations, the Coomb's test helps confirm the IMHA diagnosis if other findings are
confusing.
Serum Lactate Levels
Lactate or Lactic acid is the natural by-product of anaerobic metabolism. In other words,
when the body's organs are deprived of oxygen (perhaps because there aren't enough
functioning red blood cells circulating or there are agglutinated red blood cells clogging the
capillaries), the organs will switch to anaerobic metabolism. Lots of lactate circulating
means lots of tissue does not have enough oxygen, and it is a bad sign. It is such a bad
sign that it can be used to predict disease survivors within the first several hours of
hospitalization.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 3/9
Babesia organisms are seen within
erythrocytes and also as extracellular
organisms. Courtesy Dr. Rebecca Quam.
In a study of 173 dogs with IMHA (Holahan et al), non-survivors had significantly higher
lactate levels at presentation compared to survivors. Dogs that were able to normalize
serum lactate levels within 6 hours of hospitalization all survived. Many hospitals monitor
lactate levels in IMHA patients as part of the regular assessment of the ability to
oxygenate tissue.
Testing for Blood Parasites
In most canine episodes of IMHA, an underlying
cause cannot be found but it is still worth looking.
There are many blood parasites, especially tickborne infections, that can initiate IMHA. The
parasite attaches to the red blood cell and its
structures are detected by the immune system. The
immune system attacks the parasite but,
unfortunately, also attacks the red blood cells as
well. Parasites such as Ehrlichia, Babesia, and
Anaplasma should be ruled out. If a blood parasite
is confirmed, a more targeted therapy can be
affected.
Treatment and Monitoring During the Crisis
The patient with IMHA is often unstable. If the
hematocrit has dropped to a dangerously low level,
then a blood transfusion is needed and quickly. It is
not unusual for a severely affected patient to require
many transfusions. General supportive care is
needed to maintain the patient’s fluid balance and
nutritional needs. Most importantly, the hemolysis
must be stopped by suppressing the immune
system’s rampant red blood cell destruction, and thromboembolism must be prevented.
We will review these aspects of therapy.
Transfusion
Compatible blood can last a good 3 to 4 weeks in the recipient’s body. Well-matched whole
blood or packed red cells (a unit of whole blood with most of the plasma removed, leaving
only a concentrated solution of red blood cells) may last longer. The problem, of course,
with IMHA is that even the patient’s own red blood cells are being destroyed so what
chance do donated cells have? Cross-matching of red cells is ideal but still may not lead
to a good match given the hyperactivity of the patient’s immune response. For this reason,
it is not unusual for several transfusions to become necessary during treatment.
Immune Suppression
Corticosteroid hormones in high doses are the cornerstone of immune suppression.
Prednisone and dexamethasone are the most popular medications selected. Remember,
that the problem in IMHA is that red blood cells are being coated with antibodies that mark
them for removal. Antibodies come from lymphocytes and corticosteroid hormones kill
lymphocytes, thus taking out the cells that are making the offending antibodies. Even
better, corticosteroid hormones also suppress the cells that are removing the antibodycoated red blood cells as well. This allows the patient's red blood cells to survive and
continue their job carrying oxygen and carbon dioxide.
Corticosteroids may well be the only immune-suppressive medications the patient needs.
The problem is that if they are withdrawn too soon, the hemolysis will begin all over again.
The patient is likely to be on high doses of corticosteroids for weeks or months before the
dose is tapered down and there will be regular monitoring blood tests. Expect your pet to
require steroid therapy for some 4 months; many patients must always be on a low dose
to prevent a recurrence.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 4/9
Corticosteroids in high doses produce excessive thirst, re-distribution of body fat, thin skin,
panting, predisposition for urinary tract infection, and other signs that constitute Cushing’s
Syndrome. This is an unfortunate consequence of long-term steroid use but in the case of
IMHA, there is no way around it. It is important to remember that the undesirable steroid
effects will diminish as the dosage diminishes.
Additional Immune Suppression
If minimal response at all is seen with corticosteroids, supplementation with stronger
immune suppressive agents is necessary. The most common medication used in this case
is azathioprine. This is a serious drug reserved for serious diseases. Please follow the link
above to read more about specific side effects, concerns, etc.
Cyclosporine is an immune-modulator, made popular by organ transplantation technology.
It has the advantage over other medications of not being suppressive to the bone marrow
cells. It has been a promising adjunctive medication in IMHA but may be prohibitively
expensive for larger dogs.
Mycophenolate mofetil is another emerging immune suppressive medication that might be
prescribed. The goals of these additional medications are similar: to provide extra immune
suppression and to reduce the necessary dose of steroids, thus mitigating the steroid side
effects.
Do not be surprised if your veterinarian adds a second medication to the prednisolone or
dexamethasone and expect months of therapy to be needed.
IMHA has a relapse rate of 11-15%.
Leflunomide is an immunomodulator for patients with immune-mediated diseases when
corticosteroids either do not work or cannot be used.
Preventing Thromboembolic Disease
While it is generally agreed that the IMHA patient needs to be anti-coagulated, a definitive
drug protocol for doing so has not emerged. Heparin is a natural protein that can be
given by injection or by continuous drip. The trick is to keep the already anemic patient
from bleeding once coagulation mechanisms have been disrupted. A more pure form of
heparin called low molecular weight heparin appears to be an improvement but this form
of heparin is substantially more expensive and may be impractical.
Another approach to anticoagulation is to block platelet function by using low doses of
aspirin. The problem with aspirin is getting a dose that will inactivate platelets without also
increasing the risk of ulceration of the GI tract since aspirin and corticosteroids are
generally not compatible. A newer drug called clopidogrel has emerged as an alternative
but none of these medications (the heparins not the platelet blockers) have been shown to
definitively improve survival rate.
A study by Drs. Anthony Carr, David Panciera, and Linda Kidd at the University of
Wisconsin School of Veterinary Medicine looked for trends by reviewing 72 dogs with
IMHA. Their findings were:
The only predisposed breed they found was the cocker spaniel.
Most patients were female.
The mean age was 6.8 years.
Timing of vaccination was not associated with the development of IMHA.
94% of cases had spherocytes on their blood smears.
42% showed autoagglutination.
70% also had low platelet counts.
77% were Direct Coombs' positive.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 5/9
58% were suspected of having disseminated intravascular coagulation.
55% required at least one blood transfusion.
Mortality rate was 58%.
Of those that died, 80% had thromboembolism present on necropsy (autopsy).
Prognostic Factors for Mortality and Thromboembolism in Canine Immune-Mediated
Hemolytic Anemia. A.P. Carr, D. Panciera, L. Kidd. Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine.
2002; 16: 504-509.
Evans Syndrome
A special disaster in IMHA is Evans syndrome where not only are red blood cells being
destroyed but platelets are also destroyed (Immune Mediated Thrombocytopenia). If a
patient not only has IMHA but also has extremely low platelet numbers, this suggests that
Evans syndrome is afoot and the patient should not have treatment to prevent embolism
as the platelet loss has already created an inability to clot normally. Evans syndrome has
a particularly high mortality rate.
Thromboembolic Disease
This particular complication is the leading cause of death for dogs with IMHA (between 30-
80% of dogs that die of IMHA do so due to thromboembolic disease). A thrombus is a
large blood clot that obstructs (occludes) a blood vessel. The vessel is said to be
thrombosed. Embolism refers to smaller blood clots spitting off the surface of a larger
thrombus. These mini-clots travel and obstruct smaller vessels, thus interfering with
circulation. The inflammatory reaction that normally ensues to dissolve errant blood clots
can be disastrous if the embolic events occur throughout the body.
Heparin, a natural anticoagulant, may be used as a preventive in hospitalized patients or
in patients with predisposing factors for embolism.
Why Did This Happen?
When something as threatening as a major disease emerges, it is natural to ask why it
occurred. Unfortunately, if the patient is a dog, there is a good chance that there will be no
answer to this question. Depending on which study you read, 60-75% of IMHA cases do
not have apparent causes.
In some cases, though, there is an underlying problem: something that triggered the
reaction. A drug can induce a reaction that stimulates the immune system and ultimately
mimics some sort of red blood cell membrane protein. Not only will the immune system
seek the drug but it will also seek proteins that closely resemble the drug and innocent red
blood cells will be consequently destroyed.
Drugs are not the only such stimuli; cancers can stimulate exactly the same reaction
(especially hemangiosarcoma).
Red blood cell parasites create a similar situation, as mentioned, except the immune
system is aiming to destroy infected red blood cells. The problem is that it gets
overstimulated and begins attacking the normal cells as well.
The possible relationship between recent vaccination and IMHA development is one of the
factors that has led most veterinary universities to go to an every 3-year schedule for the
standard DHPP vaccine for dogs rather than the traditional annual schedule. The role of
vaccination as a trigger for this condition remains controversial as some studies show an
association with recent vaccination and others show none. Vaccination involves immune
stimulation, however, which may be something to avoid. Check with your veterinarian
about how to proceed with future vaccinations.
Dog breeds predisposed to the development of IMHA include Cocker Spaniels, Poodles,
Old English Sheepdogs, and Irish Setters.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 6/9
In cats, IMHA generally has one of two origins: feline leukemia virus infection or infection
with a red blood cell parasite called Mycoplasma hemofelis (previously known as
Hemobartonella felis). The underlying cause should be sought and addressed specifically
in addition to immune suppressive therapy.
Complications
Human gamma globulin transfusion is a treatment that is reserved for patients that don't
respond to traditional treatments. The gamma globulin portion of blood proteins includes
circulating antibodies. These antibodies bind the reticuloendothelial cell receptors that
would normally bind antibody-coated red blood cells. This prevents the antibodycoated red blood cells from being removed from circulation. Human gamma globulin
therapy seems to improve short-term survival in a crisis, but, unfortunately, its availability is
limited, and it is very expensive.
Another Study
A study by Drs. Tristan Weinkle, Sharon Center, John Randolph, Stephen Barr, and Hollis
Erb at Cornell University reviewed 151 dogs with IMHA looking for trends. They found:
Cocker spaniels and miniature schnauzers were both overrepresented (i.e., felt
to be predisposed). These breeds, however, showed the same mortality rate as
other breeds.
Unspayed female dogs were overrepresented.
Neutered male dogs were more commonly affected than unneutered male dogs
(begging the question of whether male hormones might have some protective
effect).
The chance of survival, either long-term or short-term was significantly
enhanced by the addition of aspirin to the treatment protocol, especially when
combined with azathioprine.
Adequate vaccination information was not obtained for enough patients to
comment on the association with vaccination.
89% of affected dogs showed spherocytes on their blood smears.
78% showed autoagglutination.
70% of patients required at least one blood transfusion.
Of the 151 dogs studied, 76% survived, 9% died, and 15% were euthanized.
Survivors were hospitalized for an average of 6 days. Non-survivors were
hospitalized for an average of 4 days.
100% of dogs that died or were euthanized showed thromboembolism on
necropsy (autopsy).
Of the dogs that survived 60 days or more, 15% experienced a relapse. Most
dogs treated with corticosteroids, azathioprine, and ultra-low dose aspirin did
not experience relapse.
[Evaluation of prognostic factors, survival rates, and treatment protocols for immunemediated hemolytic anemia in dogs: 151 cases (1993-2002). T.K. Weinkle, S.A. Center,
J.F. Randolph, K.L. Warner. S.C. Barr, H.N. Erb. Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association. Vol 226, No 11, June 1, 2005. 1869-80.]
In Summary:
Background: A healthy body removes old red blood cells from circulation.
Iron from old cells is sent to the liver and recycled into a yellow pigment
called bilirubin. The immune system is designed to fight off infection. An
auto-immune response means the body fights against itself instead of
disease and illness.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 7/9
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is a serious disease with a
high death rate. Treatment must be aggressive and not discontinued early
for the chance of survival. Transfer to a critical care or emergency facility
may be necessary.
In IMHA, the body's immune system attacks its own red blood cells, leading
to severe anemia (low numbers of red blood cells) and other lifethreatening complications. With anemia, there are not enough healthy red
blood cells left to deliver oxygen to tissues causing weakness.
Large amounts of oxygen-carrying proteins from the old blood cells can
also damage the kidneys as they are destroyed by the body in large
numbers.
The liver cannot process such a large volume of bilirubin (from the old red
blood cells), resulting in tissues appearing yellow. Urine can turn orange or
brown, and the whites of the eyes may turn yellow. This condition is called
jaundice.
An underlying cause cannot be found in most canine cases, but it is still
worth looking into.
Your pet may not feel like eating, lack energy, have a fever, jaundice, pale
gums, and a change in the color of urine.
Old red blood cells become coated with antibodies that make them sticky
so that they form clots. The clots block blood vessels, compromising blood
circulation to the organs and creating inflammation.
A clot that forms from clumped dead red blood cells covered with sticky
antibodies is called embolization. The main cause of death in IMHA occurs
when blood vessels get plugged with these clots.
Blood tests will show evidence of IMHA and other related conditions. Your
veterinarian will use those results to select the best treatment.
Treatment includes immunosuppressive drugs and possible blood
transfusions.
Immune-suppressive drugs (to decrease the body attacking itself), like
corticosteroids, are the usual treatment for IMHA. The most common
medication used is azathioprine, a serious drug reserved for serious
diseases.
Prognosis (outlook) depends on the severity of your pet's case; IMHA has a
20-80% mortality rate. Back to top
IMHA is a serious disease with a high mortality rate. Treatment must be
aggressive and not prematurely discontinued if the patient is to survive. Transfer
to a critical care or emergency facility may be necessary. Research is ongoing
with regard to new therapies.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951868&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152865
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 8/9
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune Mediated Hemolytic Anemia (IMHA) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951868&ind=13&objTypeID=1007 9/9
German Wirehaired Pointer receiving an orthopedic
exam.
Immune-Mediated Polyarthritis (IMPA) in Dogs
Sherri Wilson, DVM, DACVIM
Published: January 30, 2024
Immune-mediated Polyarthritis (or IMPA) is a condition that causes joint pain, lameness,
and swelling in multiple joints caused by an inflammatory response of your dog’s immune
system. Erosive IMPA, also called rheumatoid arthritis, is more common in older smallbreed dogs, and the joints affected are usually in the lower leg. Non-erosive IMPA is
usually seen in young, large-breed dogs. IMPA may occur in any dog; however, it is more
common in larger breed dogs, including:
American Eskimo
bull terriers
Doberman pinschers
German shepherd dogs
golden retrievers
Irish setters
Rottweilers
Labrador retrievers
pointers
spaniels
Signs of IMPA
Dogs with this condition often have a history
of:
Periodic walking issues: stiffness,
difficulty standing to walk/reluctance to walk
Swollen, warm, and painful joints
Decreased appetite or anorexia (not eating at all for a period) and increased
thirst
Enlarged lymph nodes, fever, lethargy
There are two main categories of IMPA: Non-erosive and erosive. Non-erosive
IMPA is the most common; there is no joint damage with this form. Erosive
IMPA is much less common (about 1% of cases). Erosive IMPA damages the
cartilage, leading to the joints becoming deformed.
Types of IMPA
Nonerosive IMPA
With this type of arthritis, there is inflammation in multiple joints (poly-meaning multiple),
which can be triggered by drugs, vaccines, or autoimmune conditions that affect the whole
body. The most commonly reported drug is one of the sulfonamide-containing drugs,

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune-Mediated Polyarthritis (IMPA) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=11914015&ind=14&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Great Dane with fever, lameness, and visible joint swelling in the
tarsal (ankle) area, carpals (wrists), and digits (toes). Radiographs
and joint fluid analysis confirmed Type I idiopathic polyarthritis.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Tina Wolfe, DVM, DACVS
which especially affect Doberman pinschers. Nonerosive IMPA has also been reported
with other antibiotics (erythromycin, cephalosporin, penicillin). Phenobarbital, an antiseizure medication, as well as erythropoietin, a red blood cell-boosting medication, may
also include polyarthritis as a side effect. Vaccine-induced IMPA, or IMPA triggered by
vaccines, generally happens within a month of a first vaccination or booster. These IMPA
signs resolve in a few days without immunosuppressive therapy (drugs that reduce
immune responses). Akitas may experience more severe cases of vaccine-induced IMPA.
In these cases, a dog has been on a medication long-term or perhaps restarted a
medication. Steroid-responsive meningitis-arteritis, a condition where the dog’s immune
system attacks blood vessels and the tissue coating parts of the nervous system, may
also be a cause of IMPA. Additionally, dogs can get systemic lupus erythematosus or SLE,
but SLE-related polyarthritis cases are rare as SLE is rare in dogs. Tick-borne diseases or
diseases transmitted by ticks may cause polyarthritis.
For most of these dogs, it is not known what causes non-erosive polyarthritis, and it could
be a combination of these factors.
Idiopathic IMPA
Idiopathic, in this sense, means that it
cannot be classified into any other
existing categories of polyarthritis in
dogs. Most of these cases are seen in
young, large-breed dogs. There are
four subtypes of idiopathic
polyarthritis:
Type 1: We don't know the
cause, and there is no
underlying disease that can be
found. This makes up 50 to
65% of idiopathic polyarthritis
patients.
Type 2: An infectious disease
leads to an immune system
response in the joints, causing
inflammation in 10 to 25% of
cases.
Type 3: Associated with liver or gastrointestinal diseases, making up 5% of
idiopathic polyarthritis cases in dogs.
Type 4: Associated with cancer that exists outside of the joints, making up 2%
of all dogs with polyarthritis.
Breed-Associated IMPA
Some breeds, including the Akita, Boxer, beagle, Bernese Mountain dog, spaniel breeds,
and Weimaraner, may have immune-complex synovitis or inflammation of joint capsules.
Erosive IMPA
Erosive Polyarthritis can change joint surfaces by reshaping them and causing joint
cartilage to have small lytic or punched-out lesions resembling dimples on a golf ball.
Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA) is the most described form of erosive arthritis in dogs.
Standards used to diagnose RA in dogs have been adapted from human medicine, and
there is not one specific diagnostic test for RA. There are 10 criteria used to determine if

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune-Mediated Polyarthritis (IMPA) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=11914015&ind=14&objTypeID=1007 2/4
RA is present - a dog with seven out of 10 has RA, while having five out of 10 is
suggestive. Small-breed, middle-aged dogs are often diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis
involving the wrist, knee, and digital (toe) joints.
Some dogs that initially appeared to have non-erosive IMPA occasionally can be
diagnosed with erosive IMPA over time. They always were erosive, but the classic
changes on radiographs weren’t seen initially. If clinical signs of polyarthritis persist, taking
radiographs after time has passed is recommended.
Diagnosis
Your vet will conduct a thorough physical exam to identify signs of IMPA. Blood tests can
reveal changes such as altered white blood cell counts, mild anemia or decreased red cell
counts, and increased inflammation markers. Urinalysis is recommended to check kidney
function. Tick-borne polyarthritis, which is non-erosive polyarthritis, may require specific
antibody tests. Joint fluid testing through arthrocentesis (also known as a "joint tap"), a
process where joint fluid samples are taken under anesthesia, is crucial. The timing is
important as when dogs are showing clinical signs of IMPA, they are more likely to have
positive joint taps. Imaging (X-rays, MRI) provides further insights into the condition. Nonerosive polyarthritis can result from immune reactions to infections, chronic inflammation,
or cancers. Using imaging and immunological tests, your veterinarian will check for these,
especially if the polyarthritis is being seen at an atypical age.
Periodic physical exams will be recommended if your dog is diagnosed with any form of
IMPA. It is a complex diagnostic process involving multiple aspects of your dog’s health,
and you may be referred to a veterinary internist for additional testing and treatment.
Treatment
Treatment involves medications to help control your dog’s immune system responses, and
the response to this therapy can help to confirm a diagnosis.
NSAIDs and Corticosteroids
For milder cases, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) might offer some relief, but
most IMPA patients require corticosteroids like prednisone/prednisolone or other
immunosuppressive drugs. Corticosteroids are often used alone, and dosing is adjusted
based on your dog’s response. Corticosteroids are not compatible with NSAIDs as there is
a significant risk of gastrointestinal bleeding and perforation. 
Doxycycline Trial
Tick titers (antibody levels against tick-borne organisms) have limitations, and a trial with
doxycycline is often recommended. If this completely resolves all clinical signs within 24-48
hours, your dog likely has a tick-borne disease (in which case, doxycycline is usually
recommended for 3-4 weeks). If there is a modest improvement in clinical signs or no
improvement, then immunosuppressive agents are considered. Arthrocentesis (process to
remove excess fluid from a joint)is often performed at this time as well.
Immunosuppressive Medications
Cyclosporine and leflunomide are immunosuppressive options (medications that aim to
reduce your dog’s immune response). Combination therapy (using multiple medications) is
used if monotherapy (using just one therapy) fails. Mycophenolate mofetil and azathioprine
are common additional drugs.
Supportive Therapy
Supportive therapies are also important to treat underlying causes and manage IMPA signs
and include pain medications like gabapentin, joint supplements, anti-nausea medications,
and IV fluids if needed. Some veterinarians may also suggest physical therapy to help with

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune-Mediated Polyarthritis (IMPA) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=11914015&ind=14&objTypeID=1007 3/4
joint pain and mobility. Your dog will need periodic monitoring for their IMPA signs and to
be sure medications are well tolerated. The overall treatment goal is to administer the
lowest effective dosage of the fewest drugs and help your dog have a good quality of life.
Do not change or stop any medications for IMPA without the guidance of your
veterinarian.
Monitoring
It's a complex disease, but careful monitoring and adjustments help manage it. Monitoring
involves joint taps, blood tests, and observing your dog for changes in signs and potential
drug side effects. Your dog's therapies may be adjusted depending on their clinical signs
and test results.
Prognosis
The overall prognosis for IMPA cases is fair to good, depending on the cause. Non-erosive
IMPA with no known cause may go away and never come back or may return if medications
are changed. Most dogs with erosive IMPA (rheumatoid arthritis) generally have a poorer
prognosis, experience worse joint damage and mobility difficulties over time despite
medications, and some will need lifelong treatment and monitoring. Eventually, surgical
treatment to stabilize joints may be recommended. Some dogs may have a good quality of
life with this disease and still be able to do the things they enjoy.
Talk with your veterinarian about your dog’s specific condition and what you might expect
to help your dog be as healthy and happy as possible.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11914015&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152889
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:11 PM Immune-Mediated Polyarthritis (IMPA) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=11914015&ind=14&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 01, 2024
Published: April 07, 2003
(Immune Destruction of Blood Platelets, also called ITP or IMT )
What is a Platelet?
A platelet is a cloud-shaped blood
cell, neither related to the red blood
cell line nor the white blood cell line.
Platelets assist in the clotting of blood
in that they home in on damaged
areas of blood vessels and aggregate
there, meaning that they pile onto
each other and bind, forming a small
plug to seal the hole in the leaking
blood vessel. While piled on each
other, they release assorted
biochemicals that initiate a more
permanent fibrous seal of the tear. Of
course, large tears are too big for
platelets to seal but when it comes to
small bleeds and normal blood vessel
wear and tear, platelets are the star of
the show.
There is a saying that “platelets are
vascular integrity and vascular
integrity is platelets.”
A small bleed unstaunched by a platelet aggregation quickly becomes a large bruise.
Spontaneous bruising (in other words, visible bruising from the normal wear and tear of
one's body) is a sign of reduced platelet numbers or poor platelet function.
Small abnormal bruises are called petechiae or petechial hemorrhages. Large abnormal
bruises are called ecchymoses or ecchymotic hemorrhages.
Platelets in Times of Health
Platelets come from the bone marrow, where very large cells called “megakaryocytes” spit
off little active pieces of themselves.
At any given time, some 200,000-500,000 platelets are on patrol in the circulation, though
only about 20,000 to 50,000 are considered the bare minimum to prevent spontaneous
bruising and bleeding. About 1/3 of the circulating platelets are actually stored in the
spleen, like boats in a harbor, ready to mobilize if necessary. The rest are "on duty."

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951884&ind=15&objTypeID=1007 1/5
When platelets become too old to be useful or the immune system marks them as
damaged, the spleen and liver have special cells which essentially eat old blood cells (not
just platelets) and recycle their inner materials. New cells come out to replace them, and
there is a balance between the release of platelets and the removal of platelets.
This is reviewed because the excess removal of platelets creates a platelet deficiency,
which is concerning.
These pieces are platelets, ready to enter circulation, where they will live for an average of
8 to 12 days in a dog or 6 to 8 days in a human before a bleeding capillary calls them to
their destiny. At any given time some 200,000 to 500,000 platelets are on patrol in the
circulatory system, though only about 20,000 to 50,000 are considered the bare minimum
to prevent spontaneous bruising and bleeding. About one-third of the circulating platelets
are stored in the spleen, like boats in a harbor, ready to mobilize if necessary. When
platelets become too old to be useful, the spleen has cells called phagocytes that
essentially eat old cells and recycle their inner materials.
Immune-Mediated Platelet Destruction
There are many reasons why platelets can be marked for removal. When this happens,
antibodies coat the platelets and the spleen's removal system takes them out of
circulation. If the immune reaction is amped up, platelets can be removed at up to ten
times the normal rate, overwhelming the body's ability to replace them.
If the marrow successfully receives the message to make more platelets, the
megakaryocytes there respond by getting larger and growing in numbers so that they may
step up production. The platelets produced under these circumstances tend to be larger
and more effective than normal platelets and are called "stress platelets." Unfortunately,
they die off after a day or two instead of the usual 8-12 day platelet lifespan. If antibody
levels are high, a platelet may survive only minutes or hours after its release from the
bone marrow.
Making matters worse, antibody-coated platelets that are still circulating do not function
normally. This is balanced by the especially effective stress platelets entering the scene so
that overall it is hard to predict how the balance will work out in a given patient.
Why Would the Immune System Attack the Body's Own Platelets?
Keep in mind that the immune system responds to the shapes of proteins present on a
cell’s surface. These shapes are similar to ID cards. The immune system recognizes
shapes defined as “self” and does not attack but when it sees a cell expressing protein
shapes that are “non-self,” it will respond.
If the immune system is responding to a blood parasite, tumor, drug, or other cell type (as
in lupus or immune-mediated hemolytic anemia), it will be producing antibodies against
enemy shapes. Some of these shapes may, unfortunately, resemble some “self” shapes
such as some of the shapes on the surface of the platelets. The platelets are then
misidentified as the enemy and are attacked.
What Happens to the Patient?
The usual patient is a middle-aged dog. Poodles appear to be predisposed, although
Cocker Spaniels and Old English Sheepdogs also seem to have a higher than average
incidence of this condition.
Spontaneous bruising is the major clinical sign. The gums and oral surfaces, as well as
the whites of the eyes, are obvious areas to check, as is the hairless area of the belly.
Small spots of bruising in large conglomerations called petechiae (pet-TEEK-ee-a) are the
hallmark sign. A large, purple expansive bruise might also be seen, which is called
ecchymosis. Large internal bleeds are not typical of platelet dysfunction, though bleeding
small amounts in urine, from the nose, or rectally may also indicate a platelet problem.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951884&ind=15&objTypeID=1007 2/5
When these sorts of signs are seen, a platelet count is drawn, along with usually an array
of clotting parameters, red blood cell counts to assess blood loss, and other general
metabolic blood tests. Since reliable testing to detect anti-platelet antibodies is not
available, the veterinarian must determine if any other possible causes of low platelet
count make sense.
Causes of Platelet Reduction
Dramatic reduction in platelet numbers is almost always caused by primary immunemediated destruction, which means there is no apparent cause; the immune system just
went haywire. That said, it may be worth making an effort to identify a blood parasite or
other cause of the platelet drop.
Ehrlichiosis (especially infection with Ehrlichia platys, which has recently been
renamed Anaplasma platys)
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever (Neorickettsia rickettsii)
Babesiosis (Babesia)
If an infectious agent such as one of these is responsible for immune-mediated platelet
destruction, obviously, specific therapy against the infection is warranted in addition to
therapy for platelet destruction.
Very low platelet counts can also occur in response to the suppression of megakaryocytes
within the bone marrow. This might be caused by:
Artificial estrogens
Sulfonamide antibiotics
Chloramphenicol (an antibiotic)
Chemotherapy drugs
Bone marrow cancer
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is a life-threatening, disastrous failure of
normal blood clotting and clot-dissolving functions in the body. One of its hallmark signs is
a drop in platelet count, along with a constellation of other signs.
If platelet numbers are normal but it is obvious that platelet function is not, some other
causes to look into might include:
Von Willebrand's disease (a hereditary clotting disorder)
Metabolic toxins (liver or kidney failure)
Overuse of aspirin or similar NSAID
Pancreatitis
Methimazole (for the treatment of hyperthyroid cats)
Bone marrow cancers
Therapy for Immune-Mediated Platelet Destruction
Once a tentative diagnosis of immune-mediated platelet destruction has been made, the
goal in therapy is to stop the antibody production. This, of course, means suppression of
the immune system using whatever combination of medications seems to work best for
the individual patient.
Prednisolone, Prednisone, or Dexamethasone
These steroid hormones are the first line of defense and, often, all that is necessary to
bring platelet counts back up. Unfortunately, long-term use should be expected, and this
means steroid side effects are eventually inevitable: excessive thirst, possible urinary tract
infection, panting, poor hair coat, etc. The good news is that these effects should resolve

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951884&ind=15&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Photo courtesy of MarVista Vet
once the medication is discontinued; further, if side effects are especially problematic,
other medications can be brought in to reduce the dose of steroid needed. Prednisolone is
the pre-activated form of prednisone.
Vincristine
This injectable medication is mildly immune suppressive but also stimulates a sudden
burst of platelet release from the marrow megakaryocytes. The platelets released in
response to vincristine contain a phagocyte toxin so that when they are ultimately eaten
by spleen phagocytes, the phagocytes will die. While repeated injections of vincristine
ultimately do not yield the same effect, at least a one-time dose may be extremely helpful.
Vincristine is extremely irritating if delivered outside of the vein. It must be given by IV
cleanly or the overlying tissue will slough. Vincristine is generally used for unstable or
more severely affected patients.
Azathioprine, Cyclophosphamide, or Mycophenolate
When corticosteroids alone have not yielded a good response after a week or if a
reduction in steroids dose is desired, a second immune-suppressive agent can be used.
These medications may not have steroid side effects but they have other issues of their
own that must be considered. Cyclosporine is an immune modulator often used in organ
transplantation.
Transfusion
You might think that a transfusion of blood or at least
platelet-rich plasma might be helpful in treating platelet
dysfunction. The problem is that platelets do not survive
well after removal from a blood donor. You have about 12
hours to deliver the freshly withdrawn blood to the
recipient before the platelets become inactive. After the
platelets are delivered, they are likely to live only for hours.
In general, most efforts are spent on establishing immune
suppression. That said, if the patient has had significant
blood loss as a result of her platelet deficiency, a
transfusion will certainly replace red blood cells, even if it
cannot effectively replace platelets.
Gamma Globulin Transfusion
Gamma globulins are blood proteins, including antibodies.
Human gamma globulin appears to occupy the spleen cell
removal binding sites so that coated platelets cannot be
grabbed out of the circulation.
This has been a promising therapy for both humans and dogs but is generally prohibitively
expensive. Furthermore, research has shown that results are similar to those obtained
simply by using vincristine. Since a less expensive treatment exists with less potential for
side effects, gamma globulin therapy is rarely used.
Splenectomy
If the medication simply does not work or the condition keeps recurring once medications
are discontinued, the solution may be to simply remove the spleen. After all, this is where
the phagocytes removing the platelets are primarily located. In humans, immune-mediated
platelet destruction is generally treated with splenectomy first. Response in dogs has not
been as predictably good, thus in veterinary medicine, it is generally one of the last
therapies invoked and is reserved for patients with recurrence issues.
TPO Receptor Agonists (Romiplostim and Eltrombopag)

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951884&ind=15&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Photo courtesy of MarVista Vet
Hepatic thrombopoietin is one of the
factors the liver makes in response to
removing old platelets from circulation.
Remember, when platelet removal
switches to the spleen in this disease,
hepatic thrombopoietin is not generated,
and the bone marrow may not be
properly stimulated. These two agents
have revolutionized ITP treatment in
humans, so we bring them up here.
They act by enhancing the marrow's
response to hepatic thrombopoietin. The
problem is that eltrombopag does not
bind to canine receptors, and studies of
romiplostim in dogs are sparse. That
said, it may not be long before research
progresses and TPO receptor agonists
are included in therapy.
Prognosis
The good news is that 70-90% of dogs with ITP will recover. Factors that bode poorly
include:
tarry black stools (indicating bleeding in the small intestine.)
an increase in the blood urea nitrogen test.
illness severe enough to warrant blood transfusion. (These patients appear to
have a higher relapse rate.)
Treatment continues long after the patient appears to have recovered, with the immunesuppressive agents tapered down slowly over several months. Recurrence occurs in
approximately 30% of affected dogs and most commonly occurs after two to three months
from diagnosis. When recurrence happens, medications must be stepped up. Of the dogs
that suffer a recurrence, approximately 50% will suffer yet another one. Splenectomy
results in permanent remission in approximately 60% of patients and is likely a good
choice for a dog with a recurrence problem.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951884&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152916
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia (IMT) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951884&ind=15&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Photo by MarVistaVet
Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 17, 2023
Published: November 20, 2006
Allergen Immunotherapy (AIT), or
Allergen Specific Immunotherapy (ASIT)
Allergen-specific immunotherapy (ASIT),
commonly referred to as allergy shots, are
the most effective way to address airborne
allergies, sometimes even resulting in a
permanent cure. This approach has been
used successfully in cats, dogs, and
horses. Cost can be variable depending on
the individual pet, and it commonly takes a
year to realize results and will not help the
pet (or person) experiencing symptoms
right now.
ASIT involves the use of an individuallymade serum, created using small amounts
of allergens (proteins against which the person or pet reacts). The patient periodically
receives injections of gradually increasing amounts of allergens until a maintenance level
is reached. This method of allergy control uses the patient's immune system rather than
drugs to address the symptoms of allergy. It may seem odd that injecting someone with
the very substances to which they are allergic helpful but it works.
All other therapies for airborne allergies aim to suppress the symptoms; allergen-specific
immunotherapy is the only therapy that actually works against the immunological disease.
The earlier in the allergic patient's life ASIT is started, the better the results. Regular
rechecks are needed throughout the course of ASIT.
What to Expect from Immunotherapy
Approximately half of animals being treated with immunotherapy will have an excellent
response. About 25 % will have a so-so response. About 25% will not have any response
at all.
It can easily take a year to determine if the pet is responding.
Many people go to a veterinary dermatologist with their itchy pet with the idea that
immunotherapy will have an immediate effect, and nothing could be further from the truth.
Immunotherapy takes weeks to months to work and is something one plans for next
season rather than for problems going on this allergy season.
Immunotherapy is not going to help a patient with a food allergy. A patient with a

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952556&ind=16&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Courtesy Dr. Carol Foil.
food allergy needs a food trial, not allergy shots.
When immunotherapy is combined with other forms of itch relief, even better results are
obtained.
It Starts with an Allergy Test
The term allergy test is something of a misnomer.
By the time the patient gets to this stage, we are
already pretty sure he has an airborne allergy
(atopic dermatitis) based on clinical presentation.
The testing we are about to describe is not a test to
determine if a patient has allergies or not. In fact, it
is even something of a leap to say that the patient is
allergic to the substances that create reactions.
When a substance generates a reaction in the skin
during the test or correlates to a high amount of
antibody in the blood, that does not necessarily
translate to an itchy dog. Testing is done to assess
the immunologic reactions in the skin to determine
what substances would make the best ingredients
for an allergy serum and/or what substances would be best to avoid.
Testing can be done by either intradermal skin testing or by in vitro (blood testing).
Intradermal Skin Testing
For skin testing (IDST), the patient must be referred to a specialist or a general practice
veterinarian who performs enough skin testing to maintain an appropriate collection of
allergens. The patient must be held off anti-itch medications for some time (how long will
depend on what the medications are and what the particular dermatologist recommends).
Then an area of skin is shaved, and a grid of dots is drawn on the skin to mark where the
allergens go. Sedation is generally not necessary but that depends on the patient, of
course. Small amounts of allergens are injected into the skin (the selection of allergens
varies by region and community depending on what pollens and plants are common)
along with saline control (which will define what no reaction looks like) and a pure
histamine sample (which will define what a strong reaction looks like). After an incubation
time of several minutes, the reactions in the skin are graded. The allergens creating the
strongest reactions will be selected for the serum.
Blood (or In Vitro) Testing
In vitro testing does not involve special equipment such as an allergen collection. Instead
a blood sample is sent to a laboratory for analysis and generally, it is not necessary to
withhold anti-itch medications.
The laboratory tests the blood for antibodies of the IgE class as these are the antibodies
that generate allergy symptoms. The blood is tested for IgE antibodies against different
pollens, grasses, dust mites, and other airborne substances. Substances that have
generated the highest amounts of IgE are selected for the serum.
Which Testing is Best?
What test method is best is highly controversial. Many dermatologists perform both skin
and blood tests on patients to decide what allergens should be included in the
hyposensitization serum. Some specialists feel the skin test is best and certainly the skin
test is traditional. Others feel strongly about the in vitro (blood) tests. One would think that
either test should produce the same results but this is rarely the case. Regardless of
which test is used, a specific type of company is used to make the serum vial for the
individual patient.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952556&ind=16&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Neither skin nor blood testing produces meaningful results for food allergies. For
evaluation of food allergy, a diet trial is necessary, and demonstrating IgE in the blood
against a food substance does not indicate a food allergy against that substance.
Administering Injections
Allergen doses are reflected in units called PNU (protein nitrogen units). The initial vials of
serum to be used will be the weakest (maybe 1,000-2,000 PNU per ml). The patient will
receive an increasing amount of allergen over time and will finally end with a maintenance
vial that might be as concentrated as 20,000 PNU per ml.) Typically, injections start twice
a week and eventually can be given every two weeks.
Many dosing protocols may be selected. Ideally, the owner will be giving the injections at
home but if this is not possible, the pet can be brought to the hospital for allergy shots.
The owner is given a schedule showing when to give each injection and how much to
give. The amounts will increase until it is time to move up to the next vial where the
concentration of allergens is greater.
Expect to be thoroughly educated in the art of giving injections at the time the serum is
prescribed. It may seem daunting at first but is very simple. It helps if the pet receives a
reward after injections. Used needles can be disposed of in the regular trash but it is
helpful if they are placed inside a plastic or metal container (like a liquid laundry detergent
bottle or closed coffee can) so as not to cause an accidental puncture.
In some states, it is illegal to dispose of used syringes in the regular trash. You must
instead return used needles to a needle disposal center or use a mail-in sharps container.
In some states, medical waste must go to medical waste landfills. In most cases, bringing
the needles to the veterinarian's office for disposal is acceptable. Your veterinarian can tell
you what rules apply in your state.
Injections should be timed in such a way that the pet can be observed for 30 to 60
minutes after the injection to watch for reactions. Any reactions should be reported to the
veterinarian before giving the next injection. Serious reactions are rare (less than 1% of
patients have them) but you should still be able to recognize them.
Serious Reactions Requiring Immediate Intervention
Hives
Facial swelling
Vomiting or diarrhea
Collapse
Not so Serious Reactions that Still Require Reporting
Itching
Listlessness
Swelling at the injection site
Excess panting
Frequent swallowing
Loud stomach/intestinal gurgling
Reactions are likely to lead to some kind of adjustment of the protocol. Be sure you
understand when you are supposed to return for any rechecks. ASIT is the preferred
treatment of atopic dermatitis and has the greatest potential for long-lasting effectiveness
with rare side effects.
Other Versions of Allergen-Specific Immunotherapy

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952556&ind=16&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Rush Therapy
Traditional allergen-specific immunotherapy can take six months to a year before one can
even tell if it is working. What if the patient simply can't wait that long? With rush therapy,
the first 12 injections are given over six hours instead of over six weeks. The patient must
be watched closely in the hospital for reactions during this time (hives, itching, swelling, or
even something as serious as anaphylactic shock is possible, and the doctor must be
there to promptly reverse any reactions with medication). After the rush period, the patient
can jump into maintenance therapy in a week or two. While the risk of reaction is
increased by giving allergens intensively to a sensitive patient, the procedure appears to
be safe and is the method of choice in some dermatology practices. If you are interested
in this version of allergen-specific immunotherapy, check with the doctor overseeing your
pet's serum preparation.
Sublingual Immunotherapy (SLIT)
While this version of immunotherapy has been available to human allergists for some
time, it is relatively new to veterinary practice. In this situation, an oral product is applied
daily, sometimes several times daily, and there is no tapering schedule as there is with
injections. This method is helpful to cats and dogs who did not respond to injectable
immunotherapy (50% of dogs who failed traditional injectable therapy were able to
respond well to sublingual therapy). The sublingual technique might also be preferable to
owners who are not comfortable using needles.
There are a few differences between injectable ASIT and SLIT:
The risk of anaphylactic shock appears reduced with the sublingual technique
compared to traditional injections.
SLIT vials do not require refrigeration, unlike vials for injection.
It is important that the patient not swallow the SLIT allergens so the product
cannot be given in food and the pet cannot be fed for a time after
administration.
SLIT treatments are given once or twice daily whereas the injections are given
far less frequently (every 2 weeks in the maintenance phase).
Pets that do not do well on injections often do well with SLIT, and vice versa.
In conclusion, allergen-specific immunotherapy has changed the lives of allergic patients,
both human and non-human. Pets with airborne allergies generally have an itchy season
that can be expected to recur annually and frequently gets worse every year. While ASIT
does not generally provide rapid results, it is usually very effective in the longer term or
bigger picture. If you would like to consider this for your pet, ask your veterinarian for more
details.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952556&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152944
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952556&ind=16&objTypeID=1007 4/5

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Immunotherapy for Allergies in Cats, Dogs, and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952556&ind=16&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Photo courtesy Depositphotos
Staphylococcus bacteria is the main
target of cefpodoxime. Photo
Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 21, 2021
Published: January 01, 2001
The Itching Pet: Alternatives to Steroids
Excessive licking, chewing, and scratching can make a
pet’s life miserable for month after month, even year
after year. No one likes to see their pet uncomfortable;
furthermore, the constant licking, chewing, and
scratching can keep a pet owner up at night from the
noise. Clearly, uncontrolled itching is a problem to solve
before it gets out of hand.
For
reliable rapid relief of itch and inflammation,
it is hard to match the corticosteroid
hormones such as hydrocortisone,
triamcinolone, methylprednisolone,
prednisone, dexamethasone, and others.
There are some animals that seem unable to
live with any degree of comfort without these
medications. Unfortunately, these hormones
have widespread and potentially dangerous
actions throughout the body when they are
used for inappropriately long periods and it is
generally desirable to minimize the use of
these hormones when possible to do so.
Ideally, corticosteroids are used for a few really tough itch weeks and other forms of itch
management are used for general itch maintenance.
Of course, this is easier to write about than to actually do. When your pet is scratching
and chewing raw spots on his skin, practical advice is what is called for. The following list
includes assorted non-steroidal methods for relieving itch and reducing the amount of
corticosteroid hormones needed.
Infection Control
When an animal becomes suddenly itchier, we tend to
assume there must have been a new or sudden allergen
exposure. While this is possible, most of the time what has
actually happened is an infection has taken root in the skin
as a result of scratching and chewing. In many cases,
controlling the infection will bring the pet back into its
comfort zone and many allergic animals are managed by
simply having their infections treated when they flare up.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951477&ind=17&objTypeID=1007 1/5
courtesy of CDC The usual infections involve the Staphylococci bacteria
and/or the Malassezia fungi that normally live on the skin
surface. When the environment of the skin changes
(allergic skin loses water and may have more oils), these organisms multiply and can gain
access to deeper layers of the skin through abrasions caused by scratching and chewing.
Soon there is a rash and/or an odor. Antibiotics generally handle these infections, though
sometimes culture is necessary to determine what antibiotic is needed. Expect an itchy
animal to have some skin samples reviewed under the microscope to check for infection.
Some itchy pets need continuous management for these infections while, as mentioned,
others only need periodic treatment. Ideally, additional treatments are used between
infection flare ups to extend the time between them.
Long-Acting Injectables
Lokivetmab (Cytopoint®, Canine Atopic Dermatitis Immunotherapeutic, Cadi)
A relatively new product is lokivetmab, a monoclonal antibody genetically engineered to
target the canine version of a biochemical called interleukin 31. Interleukin 31 is a type of
cytokine and is an important mediator of itching so when it is inactivated by antibodies,
relief from itch is rapidly achieved (usually beginning 8 hours after injection and readily
apparent after 1 day). For over 80% of dogs receiving the injection, results are sustained
for at least 4 weeks. That said, it does not work for every dog, and while some dogs
experience more than 4 weeks of relief, others experience less.
Lokivetmab does not affect pre-existing infections other than to make them not be itchy. It
only provides symptomatic relief, but for many itchy dogs, stopping the itch/scratch cycle
is needed to curtail the vicious cycle and stop the perpetuation of skin infections. This
product is excellent at extending the interval between skin infection flare ups.
Oral Medications
Antihistamine and Antihistamine Trials
Histamine, a biological chemical, is the chief mediator of inflammation in humans, hence
the proliferation of antihistamines available for people both by prescription and over the
counter. Histamine is not the major mediator of inflammation in dogs, thus these
medications are not as reliable for dogs as they are for us.
The International Committee on Allergic Diseases in Animals puts out guidelines for
managing atopic dermatitis, and they divide itch into acute flare ups and more chronic
daily levels of itching. They found little benefit from antihistamines for acute flare ups
except for mild cases and consider that the drowsiness side effect may be responsible for
any reduction in scratching. For more chronic cases, daily use of antihistamines fared
better with the idea that regular use might be preventing flare ups even if antihistamines
were not so good at actually treating flare ups. Responses were variable between
individuals.
While the chance of any one antihistamine being effective is small (about 15% on the
average), trying several antihistamines sequentially often leads to finding one that works.
It is important to note that many antihistamines have a drowsiness side effect.
Antihistamines commonly used for such trials include:
Diphenhydramine (Benadryl)
Hydroxyzine (Atarax)
Chlorpheniramine (Chlor-Trimeton)
Loratadine (Claritin®)
Cetirizine (Zyrtec®)
Cyclosporine (Atopica)

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951477&ind=17&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Cyclosporine is an immuno-modulating drug originally developed for use in organ
transplant patients but also useful in other immune-mediated diseases. Since allergy is
an immune-mediated condition, cyclosporine was investigated as an alternative to
corticosteroids and found effective for most patients. A good four to eight weeks are
needed to see a good response to cyclosporine which makes it fairly useless for acute
flare ups. Typically it is combined with a medication that yields rapid itch relief so that by
the time the itch is controlled, the cyclosporine can take over. Cyclosporine tastes bitter
and commonly generates a mild upset stomach when it is first used. Cyclosporine is
available for both dogs and cats.
Oclacitinib (Apoquel®)
This relatively new medication is a new approach to itch relief. Oclacitinib is called a
JANUS- kinase inhibitor and it exerts its’ effects in the skin just as rapidly as do
corticosteroids. This makes it helpful for both acute flare ups as well as long-term
management of itching. It is important to realize that its’ effects seem to be only on the
sensation of itching and, unlike steroids, there is no anti-inflammatory result. This means
that the patient’s itch can be controlled in the face of even advanced skin infection. This
might sound like a good thing but there is concern that if the patient is not itching, the pet
owner may not be motivated to perform the therapy needed to control the skin
disease. Oclacitinib is approved for dogs but feline use is being explored. Patients should
be over age one year and should not have a history of cancer or demodectic mange.
Fatty Acid Supplementation
The discovery of anti-inflammatory properties of evening primrose oils and fish oils in
humans has led to similar products on the market for our pets. These products are not
analogous to the oil supplements that are recommended to make a pet's coat shiny;
instead these are true anti-inflammatory medications capable of relieving joint pain,
cramps, and itchy skin.
They are not at all useful for acute flare ups of itching as they require weeks to build up in
the body in order to exert an effect. Instead, they are used for long-term management in
making the skin less able to generate inflammatory mediators. (Essentially, they make the
skin less reactive to allergens).
The supplement alone is mild in its ability to prevent itch but it can be used to boost the
effects of other anti-itch medications.
Ultra-Microsized Palmitoylethenolamide or "PEA" (Redonyl®)
PEA is a natural substance made by both plants and animals. In animals, it is involved in
restoring balance to the skin's biochemistry and preventing release of the biochemical
mediators of itching. (The actual process involves enhancing levels of endogenous
endocannabinoids and is fairly complex.) The commercial product uses an extract of
soybeans to obtain its PEA and creates a super concentrate as it would not be possible to
eat enough soybeans to garner a therapeutic dose of PEA. The super small "ultra
micronizing" allows for better absorption of the product. It is available as a flavored chew
for dogs and can also be used in cats.
Topical Therapies
We now know that topical steroids (cortisone crèmes, sprays, and related products) are
absorbed through the skin and into the bloodstream, but the systemic hormonal side
effects achieved with topical use do seem blunted and probably only of significance for
very small dogs. This makes topical steroid use a much safer long-term approach relative
to oral or injectable steroids. Of course, the entire animal cannot be enrobed in topical
steroid cremes but for small irritated areas (hot spots), topicals can provide excellent relief
without the systemic effects of hormones. They are best used for acute flare ups.
Shampoo Therapy

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951477&ind=17&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
There are many benefits to shampoo
therapy: luke warm water is inherently
soothing, crusts and dandruff that could be
inherently itchy can be removed, pollens
and other allergenic substances can be
washed away, the skin can be either
moisturized or stripped of excess oil
depending on what is needed and, of
course, medications can be delivered in
the shampoo lather itself. Skin can be
moisturized with shampoo therapy, which
reduces the sensitivity of the skin to itch
stimulation. (The itch threshold is raised
through skin hydration). As technology
advances, new products are introduced
and ways to prolong their effects are
developed. Here are some general choices that might be helpful:
Colloidal Oatmeal Shampoos and Creme Rinse - At first, these products were
only available for human use, as powdered soaks to pour into bath water.
Once their value in itch management was determined, their use quickly spread
to the veterinary field. Colloidal oatmeal has an unknown method of action but
generally yields one to three days of relief. The creme rinses are meant to yield
longer acting relief. They are available plain or combined with local anesthetic
formulas (usually pramoxine) to soothe itch.
Phytosphingosine Containing Products - These products contain
phytosphingosine, a natural skin biochemical important in maintaining the skin’s
natural barrier to infection and inflammatory substances. Phytosphingosine is
moisturizing, anti-inflammatory (both directly and by fortifying the skin’s barrier
function), and has antimicrobial properties (preventing and treating bacterial as
well as yeast infections). Generics are also on the market as well. The
Douxo® line is available in shampoos as well as sprays.
Lime Sulfur Dip - This product kills parasites, ringworm fungi, and bacteria. It
also dries moist, weeping skin lesions and helps dissolve surface skin proteins
that are involved in itchiness. Many veterinary dermatologists recommend it
regularly to control itch; however, it has several disadvantages. IT SMELLS
TERRIBLE. The sulfur ingredient smells like rotten eggs and this is how your
bathroom or bathing area will smell during the pet's bath. This dip can stain
jewelry and clothing and will temporarily turn white fur yellow.
Other Shampoos - Itchy skin can be the result of skin infection, excess oil
accumulation, yeast infection, even parasitic infection. The list goes on. The
shampoo products listed above can be used against any itchy skin disease but
it should be noted that there are many other shampoo and creme rinse
products that can be used against the specific conditions.
Ten minutes of skin contact is the minimum requirement for any medicated
shampoo. Premature rinsing will not allow for the therapeutic benefit to be
realized.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951477&ind=17&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Respect the Steroid
Severe itching amounts to a reduction in life quality. It is important not to develop the
mindset that corticosteroids should be avoided at all costs. This would not be fair to the
itching pet. Steroids are valuable tools in the relief of pain and suffering and have an
important place the therapy of the itchy pet.
The goal is not to avoid steroid use if possible but to avoid long term dependence on
steroids if possible. Despite all of the above management tricks, some pets will still
require long term steroid use to achieve any reasonable comfort. There are monitoring
protocols in place for such cases. It should also not be forgotten that underlying allergies
and recurring skin infections can be addressed specifically and that as these conditions
are managed, the itch is also managed.
Steroid hormones have many side effects and, as helpful as they are for allergic skin
diseases, it is best to reserve them for only the most itchy episodes.
A Few Words about Flea Control
We receive email on a daily basis from people with itchy pets who are convinced that fleas
are not involved in the problem. When we examine such pets, we find fleas actually are
contributing to the itching in at least 50% of cases and the owner is invariably surprised to
see the live fleas when they find them. Since any itchy skin disease is made worse by
fleas, good flea control is imperative and it is important not to assume that not seeing
fleas means they are not there. For example, if your pet’s itchiest areas include the lower
back, this is a strong indicator that your pet has fleas whether you see them or not. Often,
becoming diligent with flea control is the least expensive and least labor-intensive way to
control a pet’s itch symptoms.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951477&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754152973
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:12 PM Itch Relief for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951477&ind=17&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Pemphigus Foliaceus before treatment
Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Published: March 15, 2022
What is Pemphigus Foliaceus?
The immune system is the body’s defense
against infection, keeping the body healthy.
An autoimmune disease is the immune
system attacking the body. Pemphigus
foliaceus (PF) is a type of autoimmune
disease of the skin. Other skin diseases
besides PF also have the word “pemphigus”
in their name, but are different from PF.
What Species or Breeds get Pemphigus
Foliaceus?
Although an uncommon skin disease in dogs
and cats, any breed of dog or cat can develop
PF. PF also occurs in other animals, such as
horses and goats, and in people.
What are the Signs of Pemphigus Foliaceus?
In dogs and cats, PF causes pustules and
crusts. Pustules are skin bumps filled with
pus. When pustules break open, they leave behind scabs, crusts, and sores. PF skin
signs commonly occur on the face, head, and ears but can also occur on the back and
paws. Cats with PF may get pus around the claws. Dogs and cats with PF can develop a
fever and become lethargic. Pustules and sores on the paws can be painful, causing your
pet to limp. Itching caused by scabs and crusts or from a skin infection can also occur.
How is Pemphigus Foliaceus Diagnosed
Because there are other skin diseases that cause the same signs as PF, your pet’s
veterinarian will need to take skin samples to diagnose PF. Examples of the tests your
pet’s veterinarian may do include:
Skin Cytology: Samples of skin cells and debris are collected and placed on a
glass slide for examination under the microscope. This test looks for bacteria
and yeast organisms and determines what types of cells are in the skin.
Skin Biopsy: A biopsy involves removing a small piece of skin through a minor
skin surgery. A veterinary pathologist then evaluates the biopsy to diagnose the
skin disease.
How is Pemphigus Foliaceus Treated?

8/2/25, 10:13 PM Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=10814908&ind=18&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Your pet’s veterinarian will prescribe medications to make your pet more comfortable and
reduce the PF skin signs. Treatment might include corticosteroids and other medications
to keep the immune system from attacking the skin. Blood and skin samples will also help
your veterinarian adjust your pet’s medications.
How Long Does My Pet Need to be Treated for Pemphigus Foliaceus?
Every pet with PF responds differently to treatments. Although some pets with PF can
eventually stop medications, most pets need to stay on medications to prevent new crusts
and pustules. Your pet’s veterinarian will be able to adjust the medications based on
recheck examinations.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10814908&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754153010
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:13 PM Pemphigus Foliaceus in Dogs and Cats -Dog with seasonal flank alopecia; Note the darkly pigmented skin in
the areas of hair loss. Photo by MarVista Vet
Seasonal Flank Alopecia in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 29, 2025
Published: August 06, 2009
This condition is also called canine flank alopecia, cyclic flank alopecia, and recurrent
flank alopecia.
What is Seasonal Flank Alopecia?
Seasonal flank alopecia is exactly
what it sounds like, though it helps
to know that the word alopecia
means hair loss. With seasonal
flank alopecia, a dog loses hair in
the flank area on a seasonal basis.
Different dogs seem to choose
different seasons to lose their hair
(fall and spring are popular), and
when the season changes, the hair
generally grows back. Sometimes
a dog will skip a season only to
lose hair again the next year. Most
affected breeds are Boxers,
Airedales, and English bulldogs,
though numerous other breeds
have been affected.
The hair loss is generally confined to the flanks (the area just ahead of the rear legs),
though sometimes the bridge of the nose is involved. The skin is typically darkly
pigmented in the areas of hair loss. Both flanks are generally affected symmetrically, and
sometimes, there is a skin infection in the balding areas. Sometimes the hair re-grows in a
different color than the original hair. Some dogs never regrow their hair. About 20% of
dogs with this condition will have only one episode, and after the hair regrows, it never
happens again.
Diagnosis is generally made by the classic appearance of the pigmented bald spot and
the history of recurrence. Diagnosis can be confirmed with a skin biopsy if more
confirmation is desired.
Why Does This Happen?
At the present time, no one knows why this occurs. It is felt to relate to the effects that the
daylight cycle and light exposure have on the pineal gland. Shorter days seem to lead to a
decrease in melatonin from the pineal gland, leading to skin changes.
Breed predisposition suggests a genetic factor as well. Dogs of any age can be affected,
but the average age is about four years.
Treatment Options

8/2/25, 10:14 PM Seasonal Flank Alopecia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952868&ind=19&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Melatonin, a natural biochemical important in regulating circadian (daily) rhythms, has
been used successfully in many patients. In the U.S., this product is available as an oral
dietary supplement or as an implant for use under the skin.
Oral Therapy
Melatonin is sometimes used as a sleep aid in people, and the only known side effect is
drowsiness. Dosing regimens must be obtained from the veterinarian treating your dog,
but typically, oral melatonin is given two to three times daily. If the seasonal nature of the
condition becomes predictable, it may be useful to begin the supplements a month or two
before the hair loss is expected.
It is important to realize that nutritional supplements are not regulated in the same way
that prescription drugs are. This means that the manufacturer of a nutritional supplement
is not required to prove that the product contains the amount of active ingredient it claims
to have. A study on melatonin products from the University of Tennessee found
tremendous variability in content among different brands.
Under Skin (Subcutaneous) Implant
A more effective method involves the use of melatonin implants under the skin. These
were not available in the U.S. until recently. A small implant the size of a grain of rice is
implanted under the skin and between the shoulders, much in the same way as a
microchip ID. If hair regrows and it seems to work, a new implant can be inserted every
four to six months. Some drowsiness can be a side effect for the first one to three days,
and occasionally, a sterile abscess forms at the site, necessitating removal.
Seasonal flank alopecia is a cosmetic problem that is not harmful to the dog. It is not
unreasonable to leave it untreated. Discuss these options with your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952868&pid=19239
6ea3517f-f9d7-4bc0-819e-326ed798d3b0.1754153034
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:14 PM Seasonal Flank Alopecia in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952868&ind=19&objTypeID=1007 2/2 Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=10814908&ind=18&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Shar-Pei Recurrent Fever Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 26, 2024
Published: September 15, 2018
Also called swollen hock syndrome, SharPei auto-inflammatory disease (SPAID), or
familial Shar-Pei fever syndrome (FSF).
It would seem the Chinese Shar-Pei might
have enough issues to contend with, given
its potential for wrinkle-related skin and
eyelid issues, but there is a special
syndrome that every Shar-Pei owner needs
to be familiar with: Recurrent Fever
Syndrome.
As the name implies, the syndrome is
characterized by fevers that seem to arise
out of nowhere, run their course, and may or may not be responsive to anti-inflammatory
medications. The dog will feel bad during the fever episodes: listless and without appetite.
Fevers typically last 12 to 36 hours and can go as high as 107ºF. Often the dog's ankles
(hocks) become swollen during these episodes. It is normal for a Shar-Pei to have a large
skin fold around the ankle called a sock; the swelling that occurs during the fever is
different and only lasts during the fever. The muzzle may also swell and become painful,
and sometimes there is some associated nausea or diarrhea. It is important to learn how
to take your dog's temperature so you can monitor the situation.
A fever of 106ºF is a medical emergency. It is good practice to know how to take your
dog’s temperature, and it is especially important if your Shar-Pei seems listless. Normal
canine body temperature is 100-102ºF.
The fevers are unpleasant and can be dangerous if the fever rises to 106ºF, but what
makes this syndrome a serious problem is the accompanying kidney damage. An
abnormal protein called amyloid is laid down in the kidney, destroying the kidney's ability
to filter protein. The valuable blood proteins are thus lost in urine along with waste
chemicals. The dog becomes thin from the loss of body proteins, develops a propensity to
throw abnormal blood clots throughout the body (from urinating out the proteins that would
normally prevent this), and high blood pressure results.
All Shar-Pei should be regularly screened for urinary protein loss with a
urinalysis. Red flags include urinary protein and dilute urine (specific gravity
less than 1.020).
Why This Happens: Wrinkles Gone Wrong

8/2/25, 10:14 PM Shar-Pei Recurrent Fever Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=7906203&ind=20&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Photo courtesy
MarVistaVet
The characteristic skin wrinkles that make the Shar-Pei what it is are caused by
excessive production of hyaluronan. Hyaluronan is a structural protein in
everyone’s skin but a mutation in the Shar-Pei leads to multiple copies of the
genes regulating the production of hyaluronan. The result is a whole lot of
extra hyaluronan puffing up the skin and creating all the wrinkles that
characterize this breed.
All Shar-Pei have this mutation; without this mutation, the dog cannot really be a Shar-Pei
but not all Shar-Peis have this mutation in the same way. Some have a mutation that
leads to variable qualities of hyaluronan. In other words, not all the hyaluronan produced
is of a healthy quality. Poor quality hyaluronan breaks down rapidly in a process that
generates inflammation which, in turn, creates fever and damages organs. The mutation
that creates all this poor-quality hyaluronan is often called the meat mouth mutation.
It might seem that you could simply look at a Shar-Pei’s face to determine if the
dog is a candidate for fever syndrome but the situation is more complicated.
How do I Know if my Shar-Pei Has the Syndrome?
A fever can develop in a Shar-Pei from a wound or other source of
infection, just as it can in any other breed of dog. Some effort
should be made to find another source of the fever and this
generally requires a complete physical examination and some
blood testing.
As for screening tests, there is a genetic test available at Cornell
University. The mutated genetic variant that creates the meat
mouth appearance is typically in multiple copies within an affected
Shar-Pei. The more copies the dog has, the more reactive the
inflammation. The genetic test determines the number of mutated
copies present and reports the "copy number variant." The higher
this number, the more trouble for the dog. In the absence of a test,
a diagnosis is made based on the clinical findings. One episode of
fever is enough to make the diagnosis. Fevers classically begin
before 18 months but can begin at any age.
The test requires a blood sample and a six-page information form filled out by both the
owner and the veterinary professional drawing the blood. A microchip number or tattoo is
also required to confirm the patient's identity. Learn more about testing.
During a fever episode, anti-inflammatory medications provided by your veterinarian can
be used to control high fevers. Pain medication is often needed to control the discomfort
during the episode. The real challenge, however, is to prevent kidney damage in the long
term. A dog can have substantial kidney damage before the first fever episode even
happens therefore, it is important to begin therapy after the first episode and to regularly
screen for urinary protein loss in any Shar-Pei whether fevers have occurred or not.
The medication central to preventing amyloid deposition in the kidney is colchicine.
Cell division, a process more scientifically known as mitosis, requires microscopic protein
fibers acting like structural cables to pull dividing cells apart. These cables are called
mitotic spindles, and colchicine interferes with their formation. The ability of colchicine to
interfere with this sort of structural protein formation has led to its use in abnormal protein
depositions such as amyloidosis. This means that colchicine can prevent the kidney
damage that occurs in recurrent fever syndrome.

8/2/25, 10:14 PM Shar-Pei Recurrent Fever Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=7906203&ind=20&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Recently, legal issues have forced generic colchicine off the market, leaving only the
brand-name product Colcrys®. This medication is problematically expensive for most pet
owners. Colchicine can also be obtained through a compounding pharmacy, but a
prescription is still necessary.
The manufacturer of Colcrys®, Takeda®, has a patient assistance program called Help at
Hand®. Dog owners may find out more information and apply by calling (800) 830-9159.
Other Therapy
Antioxidants are important in amyloid prevention in that they help preserve cell membrane
fatty acids. Current recommendations include supplements in omega 3 fatty acids (fish oil)
and a quality multivitamin. Antioxidants such as vitamin C, lecithin granules, and
glucosamine supplements to improve the hyaluronan quality are also recommended.
Consult your veterinarian for a specific protocol for your dog. Early intervention is the goal
of this condition.
Herbal antioxidants have also been recommended. Normalizing proper hyaluronan
metabolism may require magnesium supplementation. Consult your veterinarian for
specifics.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=7906203&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153077
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:14 PM Shar-Pei Recurrent Fever Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=7906203&ind=20&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Calcinosis cutis caused by long-term corticosteroid exposure.
Image courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil
Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: December 16, 2023
Published: February 08, 2004
Most people are familiar with cortisone
and may even know that it is a steroid
but, even though steroids are commonly
prescribed to both people and animals,
much more knowledge than that is not
really mainstream. Steroid hormones are
used to treat many types of diseases,
and it turns out that by altering the
dosage of a steroid, a completely
different effect is achieved. This means
steroids can treat inflammation, improve
appetite, suppress an overactive immune
system, reduce secretions, relieve
itching, and more. Steroids can be shortacting, long-acting, intermediate-acting,
oral, injectable, topical, or even
inhalational. With so many uses possible,
it is important to know which effect(s) your doctor is going for.
Let's take a few moments to straighten out the vocabulary of steroid hormones to
understand what is in that bottle of pills so frequently dispensed. A lot of terminology can
be confusing, so it is good to have some basis for what your veterinarian is talking about.
Steroid: A hormone with a cholesterol-based structure is a steroid hormone. There are sex
steroids (like anabolic steroids that bodybuilders should probably not be using) and
adrenal steroids. The steroids that are most commonly used therapeutically are adrenal
steroids.
Corticosteroid: Adrenal steroids can be produced by the center of the adrenal gland or by
the outer cortex of the adrenal gland. Corticosteroids come from the outer cortex of the
adrenal gland. There are two types: glucocorticoids (which address sugar metabolism)
and mineralocorticoids (which address electrolyte metabolism). We are concerned with
the glucocorticoids for this discussion.
Examples of Glucocorticoids
Cortisol: This is the natural hormone produced by one's adrenal glands to regulate sugar,
fat, and salt metabolism in times of stress.
It turns out cortisol can be made in the laboratory, and when it is, we call it hydrocortisone
(or sometimes just plain cortisone.) Hydrocortisone is a common topical steroid used in
assorted anti-itch products. Modifications of it make it stronger or longer acting, such as
mometasone, which is used in human nasal products as well as veterinary ear
medications.

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952031&ind=21&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Oral Glucocorticoids
Prednisone: In order for prednisone to become an active hormone, the liver has to convert
it into prednisolone. Prednisone can be produced in the laboratory and is readily available
as a medication.
Prednisolone: In order for prednisone to become an active hormone, it must be further
activated by the liver into prednisolone. Again, prednisolone can be produced in the
laboratory and is readily available as a medication.
Methylpredisolone (Medrol ): By altering the prednisolone molecule in the laboratory, the
potential for side effects can be changed. One issue is the increased thirst side effect. By
changing the prednisolone structure slightly, less salt retention occurs, leading to less
thirst compared to what happens with regular prednisolone. Less thirst means less
urination and less chance of an accident in the house.
Dexamethasone (Azium ): Adding still more methyl groups creates an even stronger
steroid with even less salt retention side effects. Dexamethasone can also be
manufactured in the laboratory and is readily available as a medication that can be used
topically, orally, or as an injectable.
Injectable Steroids
We have already covered dexamethasone, which can be used as an injectable. Other
modifications have led to:
Methylprednisolone Acetate (Depomedrol): This steroid is very strong and can maintain
an anti-inflammatory effect for several weeks. This is helpful for patients (especially cats)
who may not readily accept oral shorter-acting steroids every day. One shot can cover a
long period of time, but the downside is that the injection makes for a high dose that
wanes over months. The anti-inflammatory effect may last a few weeks, but the
suppression of the natural adrenal system continues for months after that.
Triamcinolone (Vetalog): Intermediate-acting but strong, lasting a couple of weeks. Similar
downsides as above.
So we have covered some of the benefits of steroid therapy.
There has never been a class of drug that has more application in disease
treatment than glucocorticoids. Indeed, this group is rivaled only by antibiotics
in lives saved.
That said, side effects from the glucocorticoid group are numerous and can be classified
into those seen with short-term and long-term use.
Short-Term Side Effects
A pet on glucocorticoids is likely to experience:
Increased hunger
Increased thirst and possibly urinary incontinence for dogs if there is
inadequate access to an area for appropriate urination
Panting (dogs)
General loss of energy
Hidden infection being unmasked, especially upper respiratory infections in
cats.
®
®

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952031&ind=21&objTypeID=1007 2/4
These side effects are generally classified as inconvenient but not serious. If a shortacting oral steroid is being used, often simply changing the dosing schedule solves these
problems. If a long-acting injectable is used, you simply have to wait for it to wear off.
But there are also more serious side effects:
Pre-diabetic animals may be tipped over into a diabetic state with steroid use.
Often, in these cases, the diabetes resolves once the steroid wears off.
A similar situation exists for patients with borderline heart function (a situation
for which cats are notorious). The extra salt retention from steroid use can
prove to be just too much for a heart that can barely manage its normal fluid
volume. The salt causes fluid retention, and a borderline heart may not be able
to manage.
Even these serious side effects can resolve once the steroid wears off, but it is important
to be aware of these possibilities. The above scenarios are rare, but if they happen to your
pet, they will not feel rare to you.
Long-Term Side Effects
Many conditions require long-term suppression of the immune system. Glucocorticoid
doses generally include an anti-inflammatory dose that is lower and an immunesuppressive dose that is higher, though with long enough term use, lower doses will
become immune-suppressive. When steroid use stretches out for more than four months,
a new set of side effects, in addition to those listed above, becomes of concern:
Latent urinary tract infections in up to 30% of patients. Monitoring for these with
periodic urine cultures is necessary. The patient will not have the usual
symptoms of urinary infection as the steroid will suppress the inflammation
associated with the infection. Culture may be the only way to detect the
infection.
Development of thin skin, blackheads, and poor ability to heal wounds or grow
hair
Development of obesity and muscle weakness
Hard plaques of diseased skin called calcinosis cutis (see photo above). These
plaques are calcium being deposited in the skin.
Predisposition to infection of any kind/weakening of immune defenses
Development of Cushing’s syndrome.
All of the above listed effects can be seen and be considered symptoms of this syndrome.
When long-term therapy is needed, monitoring tests become especially
important; requesting refill after refill without regard for the potency of these
medications is not appropriate. Periodic urine cultures, check-ups and even
blood testing is part of responsible on-going corticosteroid use. Your
veterinarian will suggest appropriate tests.
Steroid Alternatives
When a long-term dose of steroids is deemed to be excessive or if the short-term effects
become problematic, it is time to seek another medication so as to spare the amount of
steroids needed, if not replace the steroid altogether. Recently there has been a
proliferation of medication for itch relief without the use of steroids. For alternative
immunomodulating drugs, consult your veterinarian.

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952031&ind=21&objTypeID=1007 3/4
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952031&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153109
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Steroid Use in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952031&ind=21&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Photo courtesy of Dr. Patricia Lechten.
Strangles in Puppies
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 01, 2024
Published: February 23, 2009
Also called juvenile cellulitis or sterile granulomatous dermatitis and lymphadenitis
Puppy strangles is a classical disease though
fortunately not a common one. It comes up
suddenly, manifesting as marked swelling of
the muzzle, eyelids, and face in a puppy
between the ages of 3 weeks and 6 months of
age. The owner may be inclined to think the
puppy was bitten by a stinging insect or a
spider.
Soon the lymph nodes of the throat become
spectacularly enlarged, giving the puppy the
appearance of having the mumps. It doesn’t
take long for the swelling to give way to
pimples that rupture, bleed, and crust. The
inner surface of the ear flaps are commonly
involved as well and occasionally lesions in other body areas occur. Lesions are painful
more than they are itchy.
Fever, joint swelling, and loss of appetite occur in approximately 25 percent of patients. If
treatment is delayed, permanent hair loss can result in the most severely affected areas. If
the puppy is sick enough, the condition can be life-threatening.
Predisposed breeds include the Golden Retriever, Dachshund, and Gordon Setter.
Treatment
Despite the extreme inflammation and secondary infections, the heart of treatment for this
condition is immune-suppression. High doses of corticosteroids such as prednisone are
needed as this condition is an immune-mediated disease and no specific underlying
cause has been identified.
In other words, the puppy’s immune system is acting excessively and inappropriately and
it must be subdued. Antibiotics may be needed for the secondary infections but antibiotics
alone will not treat this condition. Once suppression of the overly active immune system
occurs, improvement is usually rapid.
Puppies with strangles have a fairly characteristic
appearance and are usually diagnosed on that basis.
That said, because the treatment involves suppressing
the immune system, it is best to rule out conditions that
might look similar but for which immune suppression
would be inappropriate. Generalized demodectic mange,
an infection involving mange mites, also has a facial

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Strangles in Puppies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952835&ind=22&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Photo courtesy MarVistaVet
orientation and can look similar to juvenile cellulitis. Skin
scrapes can be performed to check for the presence of
mites. A skin biopsy should settle any questions about
what condition is present.
A severe infection can be ruled out by looking at samples
of the pimple contents under the microscope, noting that
no bacteria are present despite the dramatic number of
inflammatory cells. A secondary infection, though, can be
present in which case the doctor must use clinical
judgment about the appearance of the lesions and the
patient’s history to make the diagnosis.
The condition generally resolves in 10 to 14 days and usually does not recur. Ensure you
administer the treatment for the length of time prescribed by your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952835&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153139
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:15 PM Strangles in Puppies - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952835&ind=22&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) in Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: March 26, 2025
Published: January 21, 2007
Background and Signs
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is a
fairly rare, chronic autoimmune disease that
is also potentially fatal. The dog’s immune
system fights itself by forming antibodies that
“protect” it against its own cells and tissues.
This results in inflammation and tissue
damage in the skin, heart, lungs, kidneys,
joints, nervous system, and blood. Usually,
several organs are affected. SLE can be
managed but not cured. While the disease
itself is chronic, signs can be acute, chronic,
or both. Lifelong treatment is necessary. It is
different from discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE), which is a skin disease.
The word lupus is Latin for “wolf.” (Some humans get a facial rash that has a slight
similarity to a wolf’s face.)
Breeds most typically affected by SLE include Afghan Hounds, Beagles, German
Shepherds, Irish Setters, Old English Sheepdogs, Poodles, Rough Collies, and Shetland
Sheepdogs. Dogs are usually middle-aged when they get SLE. Females are not more
likely than males to get SLE.
The most common significant signs of SLE are:
Non-erosive polyarthritis (arthritis that affects several joints)
Painful muscles and shifting lameness
Skin sores and blisters
Proteinuria (protein in the urine)
Decreased platelet and white blood cell count
Fluctuating fevers
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
Some less-significant signs are mouth ulcers, inflamed lining of the chest cavity or heart,
dementia, swollen lymph nodes, and seizures. Usually, dogs with SLE are first taken to
the veterinarian because of skin problems or lameness.
Diagnosis
Blood tests are needed for diagnosis. While all dogs won’t have the same signs, dogs with
SLE typically test positive for anti-nuclear antibodies (ANA). This multi-system disease
has so many effects that it’s hard to rule any one disease in or out. Diagnosis is typically
made using a combination of a positive ANA test with at least two significant signs. A

8/2/25, 10:16 PM Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952585&ind=23&objTypeID=1007 1/2
positive ANA test, with one significant sign plus two less-significant signs, is also indicative
of SLE. (SLE can be suspected if there is only one significant sign plus positive ANA or if
there are two significant signs with a negative ANA test.) It can be difficult to make a
positive diagnosis since other problems, such as drug reactions and cancer, can have
many of the same signs. (ANA can be positive with any chronic inflammatory disease, so
if there are no other consistent pathologic or clinical signs, your veterinarian may suspect
a false-positive ANA.)
Treatment
Treatment is aimed at decreasing the inflammation and autoimmune activity, so treatment
centers around anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive medications such as
corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone). Sometimes, a second immunosuppressant, such as
azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, or cyclosporine, will be necessary. Specific problems,
such as kidney or spleen damage, will also have to be treated. Treatment plans depend
on what organs are affected.
The sun's UV rays can cause flare-ups of SLE, so exposure to sunlight should be limited.
Prognosis (Outlook)
The prognosis depends entirely on how each dog is affected, but owners can expect that
their pets will require life-long treatment. Unfortunately, sometimes the damage caused by
this disease can result in death.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952585&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153169
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:16 PM Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952585&ind=23&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Pepper's facial swelling is
actually from an insect
bite, but looks identical to
the facial swelling of a
vaccination reaction.
Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 16, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
With vaccination commonly recommended annually, most pet owners are accustomed to
taking their pets to the vet for "yearly shots." It seems such a commonplace part of routine
pet care that many people do not think about what is actually occurring within their pet's
body. In fact, immunization represents stimulation of the immune system, an inherently
inflammatory process.
What is Considered Normal?
After vaccination, it is usual for pets to return home and re-engage in normal activity;
however, since vaccination is inflammatory by nature, sometimes there are symptoms for
a couple of days:
Pain at the vaccine site
Mild Fever
Lethargy
Reluctance to play or exercise
Reduced appetite
Sneezing after a nasal vaccine
These symptoms are considered normal for the vaccination process. Treatment is
generally unnecessary, though sometimes an appropriate anti-inflammatory medication is
needed for comfort. The patient can be expected to be back to normal in a couple of days.
Again, if these reactions are seen, there is no reason to alter vaccination
recommendations or plans for the patient's future as these symptoms are inherent to the
vaccination process and are considered normal.
What is not Normal and When is Treatment Required?
Occasionally, a reaction is extreme and potentially dangerous. As
vaccine technology has advanced, these reactions are more and
more rare but it is important to know when to take action. The
following symptoms are more serious and your veterinarian should
be notified at once, especially if they occur within hours of
receiving the vaccine:
Vomiting or diarrhea
Facial swelling
Hives
Collapse
Difficulty breathing
These symptoms can be part of an anaphylactic reaction, which is
more extreme and potentially life-threatening in its most severe
form. Any symptoms from this list should be taken seriously and
future vaccination plans should be altered to avoid more severe

8/2/25, 10:17 PM Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951409&ind=24&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Photo courtesy of Dr.
Wendy Brooks.
problems. These types of vaccination reactions tend to get worse
with subsequent exposure to the offending protein. The reaction
can be directed against the infectious organism, vaccine
stabilizers, preservatives, or residue from the vaccine organism's
laboratory tissue culture.
Which Pets are Likely to Have Vaccination Reactions?
In October 2005, a study by Moore et al was published in the Journal of the American
Veterinary Medical Association in which over 1 million canine medical records in over 350
separate animal hospitals were reviewed. In this study, approximately one in 250 dogs
had some sort of vaccination reaction, which translated to 13 reactions for every 10,000
doses of vaccine given.
The group at greatest risk for reaction were small breed young adult (age 1-3 years)
neutered male dogs. As a dog's size increased, the risk of vaccination reaction dropped.
Not surprisingly, the more vaccines that were given at one time, the higher the risk of
reaction. Most reactions occur the same day as the vaccine is given.
Multivalent Vaccines vs. Multiple Vaccines
Some vaccine doses include protection against multiple organisms. These are called
multivalent vaccines and include the basic distemper-parvo vaccine for dogs and some
Bordetella vaccines. Since giving more vaccines at once is associated with an increased
risk of reaction, you might expect that using multivalent vaccines would also increase the
risk of reaction, but surprisingly this was not found to be the case.
What to do During the Reaction
If your pet is having a reaction more severe than just some general malaise or soreness,
you should let your veterinarian know right away. If it is after hours, it is prudent to consult
the local emergency clinic. Anti-inflammatory injections can be used to halt the
inflammatory cascade before it gets dangerously out of hand. Be sure you know who to
call in case of problems after your pet is vaccinated.
Vomiting may be a sign of an on-coming serious reaction or could represent something as
mild as car sickness. If vomiting is observed, let your veterinarian know right away.
Preventing Future Vaccine Reactions
After a pet has had a vaccine reaction, what do you do the next time vaccinations are
due? There are several steps that can be used as prevention.
Be Sure your Veterinarian is Aware of your Pet's History of Vaccine Reaction
Obviously, if you know your pet has had vaccination reactions in the past, be sure to
inform the staff so that proper premedication can be given. Do not wait until after vaccines
have been given and THEN inform the staff that there is a history of reaction. It is also
extremely helpful to know what the reaction consisted of; a little lethargy, local soreness or
mild fever is considered normal for the vaccination process and does not constitute a
significant reaction. If you know what vaccines preceded the reaction, the staff will also
need to know that.
Be Prepared to Pay for Extra Pre-Medications and/or Observation
Medications such as antihistamines or corticosteroids can be used to head off allergic
reactions before they happen, and with the use of these medications a reacting pet can be
vaccinated normally. To be safe, it is frequently recommended that the pet be observed for
the rest of the day following vaccination, despite the medication. Allow extra time for the
pre-medications to be in effect before vaccinations are given. Consult your veterinarian for
a recommendation.

8/2/25, 10:17 PM Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951409&ind=24&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Avoid Giving Several Vaccinations at Once
Keep in mind that vaccines given within two weeks of each other can interfere with each
other so you do not want to separate vaccines by less than a two-week period but
separating vaccines can mean your pet has less stimulation to deal with at one time.
Breaking up vaccination also helps determine which vaccine is the culprit. If multiple
vaccines are due, consider spreading them out by at least 3-4 weeks if possible. It may be
tempting to request giving half doses to reduce immune stimulation, but this will not result
in complete vaccination and is not a valid alternative.
Do Not Have Your Pet Vaccinated at a Vaccine Clinic
Vaccination clinics are designed to provide streamlined service for healthy pets in need of
their regular immunizations. These clinics are generally not prepared for the individual
attention required by a pet who has a history of vaccination reaction. Many clinics are
mobile and have moved to the next site by the time a pet has started showing reaction
symptoms. A pet with a vaccine reaction history should receive some observation in the
hospital and/or pre-treatment with anti-inflammatory medication as described above. It is
probably best to utilize your primary care veterinarian if your pet has special vaccination
needs.
Avoid Vaccination Altogether?
Vaccination reactions severe enough to produce shock are extremely rare and are a
function of an individual pet's immune response. If a pet has suffered a severe or lifethreatening reaction in the past, it is not worth continuing to expose the pet to the same
allergen again.
Every hospital has its own policy regarding what vaccines are recommended for dogs and
cats in general and what vaccines are required for boarding or grooming. Most
communities have legal requirements for rabies vaccination and may or may not allow
exemptions. Vaccine recommendations differ regionally and according to the pet's lifestyle
as well as according to the philosophy of the veterinarian in charge of defining a particular
hospital's policies.
An alternative may involve having a "vaccine titer" checked. This involves a blood test to
check for a minimum antibody level. If the patient has an antibody level believed to
correlate with protection, vaccination may not be needed at that time. There is some
controversy regarding titering as it is not available for all the infectious diseases that one
might vaccinate for. Further, there is a great deal more to immunologic protection than an
antibody level. To determine if titering is right for you, discuss this option with your
veterinarian.
Avoid Leptospirosis Vaccine?
The leptospirosis portion of the DHLPP (distemper) vaccine for dogs has a reputation for
being the most likely portion to cause vaccine reactions. This is largely because of the
huge size of the inactivated organism that is included in the vaccine and partly related to
the bovine serum albumin (a cow blood protein) used in its production. (Extraneous
proteins create unnecessary immune stimulation and predispose to reaction.) A traditional
technique in avoiding vaccination reactions is to avoid leptospirosis vaccine, giving the
rest of the distemper combination vaccine without it.
That said, vaccine technology has improved over the years, and many vaccines only use
portions of the leptospirosis organism to avoid excess inflammation. Newer production
methods have substantially reduced the amount of bovine serum albumin used in
manufacture.
Whether or not an individual dog should be vaccinated against leptospirosis is not a
foregone conclusion. The infection is indeed serious and is transmissible to humans.
Rural dogs are classically infected via water puddles contaminated with rat or wildlife
urine, while urban dogs are typically exposed in boarding facilities, parks, or similar areas

8/2/25, 10:17 PM Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951409&ind=24&objTypeID=1007 3/5
where dogs are crowded and exposed to other dogs' urine. Discuss your dog's lifestyle
with your veterinarian to determine if leptospirosis should be included in your vaccine
regimen.
How important vaccination for leptospirosis is has become a matter of some controversy.
The infection is serious and contagious to humans, and exposure generally involves urine
contamination of outdoor puddles of water by wildlife or other dogs. Most dogs that
become infected, however, are exposed in their own backyards. Some hospitals include
leptospirosis in their protocol, while others omit it. Consider what infections your pet is
actually going to be at risk for in your geographic area to avoid unnecessary vaccination,
and discuss concerns with your veterinarian. See more on leptospirosis.
Vaccination is an important part of responsible pet ownership and should not be omitted
without specific veterinary guidance. Every hospital has its own policy regarding what
vaccines are recommended for dogs and cats in general and what vaccines are required
for boarding or grooming. Vaccine recommendations differ regionally and according to the
pet's lifestyle as well as according to the philosophy of the veterinarian in charge of
defining a particular hospital's policies.
Lumps that Develop at the Injection Sites
The makeup of a vaccine includes an infectious organism rendered harmless but still
capable of stimulating the immune system. In some instances, the organism is live but
weakened in some way. In other instances, the organism is killed. Some vaccines are
made from killed bacterial organisms rather than viral organisms, and other vaccines
(such as for rattlesnake bites) are made against proteins, and no infectious organism is
involved. The larger the organism and the more complicated the proteins, the more local
inflammation results after the injection, and this sometimes translates into a firm knot or
bump at the injection site. These growths are typically noted a few weeks following
vaccination and generally resolve on their own. These are not allergic reactions but are
inflammatory reactions caused by the immune stimulation. If a lump persists longer than
three months from the time of vaccination or is larger than 2 cm in diameter any time after
vaccination, it should be removed and biopsied. This removal is particularly true for cats
as they have the potential to develop injection site tumors.
Reporting a Vaccination Reaction
The United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is responsible for licensing animal
vaccines. The agency within the USDA that is immediately responsible is the Center for
Veterinary Biologics. This agency is responsible for reviewing vaccine reaction reports and
considers whether or not the manufacturer must perform additional investigation. The
CVB is also responsible for unannounced testing of vaccine-producing facilities.
Vaccination reactions may be reported to the CVB directly or to the manufacturer, though
the manufacturer is not required to pass vaccine reaction reports along to the CVB. The
advantage of reporting reactions to the manufacturer instead of the CVB is that often the
manufacturer will cover the costs of treatment as long as the reaction extends beyond the
mild malaise that is a natural result of the vaccination process. Different manufacturers
have different policies regarding reimbursement but if you find yourself with a significant
expense from a vaccine reaction, it may be worthwhile to have your veterinarian look into
reimbursement from the manufacturer. Report a vaccine reaction to the Center for
Veterinary Biologics.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951409&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153230

8/2/25, 10:17 PM Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951409&ind=24&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:17 PM Vaccine Allergic Reactions in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4951409&ind=24&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrome in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 21, 2023
Published: August 15, 2004
(Also called Uveodermatologic Syndrome)
True VKH syndrome is a human disease, well described for nearly a century. A similar
disease in dogs has been described but since we do not know the relationship between
the canine and human disease, we are hesitant to call the canine version VKH syndrome
as well. Until we know what is really going on in dogs, we will leave it at VKH-LIKE
syndrome or, more accurately, uveodermatologic syndrome.
A syndrome is a collection of symptoms. In humans, VKH syndrome consists of the
following:
Deep inflammation of the eye tissues (a process called uveitis) leading to at
least partial blindness. Approximately 70% of people with VKH syndrome
become blind and it is usually the inflammation in the eyes that appears as the
first sign of VKH syndrome.
Premature whitening of the hair (present in 90% of affected people).
Whitening of the skin (present in 50% of affected people).
Inflammation of the membranes of the nervous system (a process called
meningitis). This leads to deafness in about half of the people affected with
VKH syndrome.
Affected people are typically of Mediterranean, Hispanic or Asian descent. There are
numerous links for more information regarding this condition in humans.
The syndrome in dogs includes:
Uveitis leading to blindness that, as in humans, is usually the first sign to show.
The owner would notice that the eyes seem painful and/or bloodshot. The
patient may bump into things and show diminished vision. The pupils are
classically constricted and the eye may seem cloudy or may seem to change
color from normal.
Whitening of the coat, sometimes confined to the face (present in 90% of
affected dogs) This typically begins 3 to 6 months after the eye disease has
started.
Whitening of the skin, usually most obvious on the nose, lips, eyelids, footpads,
and scrotum (occurs in 50% of affected dogs).

8/2/25, 10:18 PM Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrome in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952086&ind=25&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Sheila has a normal haircoat. Photo Courtesy Animal
Ophthalmology Clinic, Ltd.
Sheila's black pigmentation began fading. Photo Courtesy
Animal Ophthalmology Clinic, Ltd.
Unlike the human disease, deafness or meningitis is not a feature. The most
detrimental part of the syndrome is blindness.
What Causes this Syndrome?
Uveodermatologic syndrome is an immune-mediated disease where the body
inappropriately attacks its own melanocytes (the pigment-producing cells). These cells
seem most prevalent in the skin, retina, and uveal tract of the eye. It is speculated that the
immune reaction is initially triggered by a virus though research is ongoing.
Male dogs are affected more than female dogs.
Akitas and Nordic breeds are primarily affected. (Actually, 80% of reported
cases involve Akitas and as many as 4.1% of Akitas are affected.)
How is the Diagnosis Made?
The best way to confirm this diagnosis is by a skin biopsy (the lip is said to be the best
location). Treatment, however, is focused on the eye disease as this has the most serious
outcome ‒ blindness ‒ while skin disease is generally cosmetic.
Uveitis is most literally inflammation of the uveal tract of the eye. The uveal tract consists
of the iris (the colored portion), the ciliary body (the area inside from which the lens is
suspended), and the choroid (the vascular coating of the inside). The treatment for uveitis
due to a VKH-like syndrome is the same as for other causes of uveitis.
Thanks to the Animal Ophthalmology
Clinic, Ltd. for these pictures. See the
complete case study of Sheila.
Treatment
Uveitis, whether it is caused by VKH-like
immune-mediated inflammation or
something else, is treated by suppressing
the inflammation. This means
corticosteroids (such as prednisone) are
taken orally as well as topically. VKH-like
syndrome will require ongoing immune
suppression to prevent blindness and
since long-term steroid use is undesirable
therapy often switches to azathioprine,
cyclosporine, or some other stronger
immunomodulating agent. Topical therapy
is also necessary; steroid-containing eye
drops or injections of steroids into the
conjunctival membranes are commonly
used.
With aggressive treatment, some dogs
are able to regain some vision but in
general, vision cannot be preserved and a
more realistic goal is to control the eye
pain. Blind dogs still have a good quality
of life as long as the pain is controlled.
A 2018 study published in the JAVMA by
Zarfoss et. al., reviewed 50 dogs with
uveodermatologic syndrome. At the initial
evaluation, 36% of dogs had glaucoma

8/2/25, 10:18 PM Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrome in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952086&ind=25&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Complete vitiligo. Photo Courtesy Animal Ophthalmology
Clinic, Ltd.
(increased eye pressure) and 57% were
blind in both eyes. Some dogs were able
to regain vision and 50% of subjects could
see in at least one eye at the end of the
study. Of the dogs that ultimately became
blind in both eyes, blindness came on
over 13.5 months (median). At least 10
eyes had to be removed in order to
provide long-term comfort.
For more information on living with a blind
dog, see Blinddogs.net or Petfinders.
There is also a book by Caroline Levin
titled Living with Blind Dogs: A Resource
Book and Training Guide for the Owners
of Blind and Low-Vision Dogs.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952086&pid=19239
bb8da739-d227-45a0-8dad-9fe579f9e420.1754153270
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 10:18 PM Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada-Like Syndrome in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254086&id=4952086&ind=25&objTypeID=1007 3/3

