Kidneys are located at
the level of the lower
back and the adrenal
glands (shown in
yellow) sit atop the
kidneys. Graphic by
MarVistaVet
Cut surface of
adrenal gland
Addison's Disease (Hypoadrenocorticism)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 11, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
Adrenal Hormones
The adrenal gland is so named because it is located just forward of
the kidney (renal means kidney). The center of the gland is called
the medulla and the outer area is the cortex. While both areas
produce hormones, Addison's disease concerns the hormones
produced by the cortex; these hormones are called corticosteroids.
Corticosteroids are the hormones that enable us to adapt
physiologically to stress. The glucocorticoids (such as cortisol and
related synthetics, prednisone, dexamethasone, and numerous
others) act on the mechanics of sugar, fat, and protein metabolism.
They gear the metabolism towards the preparation of burning, rather
than storing, fuels so as to be ready for a fight or flight situation.
The mineralocorticoids (such as aldosterone and related synthetics,
fludrocortisone acetate, and desoxycorticosterone pivalate) influence
the electrolytes sodium and potassium. You may wonder what
electrolytes have to do with fight or flight but it is important to
remember that where there is sodium (salt), water soon follows.
Conserving sodium will pull water from other tissues and bring it into
circulation, ready to support blood pressure should a life-threatening
bleed occur. The mineralocorticoid hormones instruct the kidney to
retain sodium so that the circulatory changes of stress can be
handled smoothly. As sodium is retained, potassium is lost in the
exchange.
Corticosteroid hormones are needed to adapt to stressful situations and
without these hormones, even small stresses could lead to physiologic
disaster.
Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's Disease) is a Deficiency in Corticosteroid
Hormones
In animals with Addison's disease, there is a deficiency of corticosteroid
hormones. There are several reasons why this might happen: the adrenal
gland might be damaged or drugs may be involved. Usually, a cause for
an individual patient's Addison's disease is not determined, but the good
news is that there's no need to know why it happened. Treatment is
straightforward: provide the hormones that the body is not making on its
own.
Clinical Signs

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Addison's Disease (Hypoadrenocorticism) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951484&ind=218&objTypeID=1007 1/4
(the outer layer,
in yellow, is the
cortex). Graphic
by MarVistaVet
Patients are usually young (age four to five years) but any age dog can be
affected. (This disease can occur in cats but is very rare.) There is a
genetic predisposition for Addison's disease in the standard poodle and
bearded collie, Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retriever, and Portuguese water
dog. Female dogs are affected twice as often as males.
At first, signs may be vague: listlessness, possibly some vomiting, or diarrhea. The dog
just does not seem to feel right, but not in an obvious way, and may seem more or less
normal most of the time as symptoms wax and wane with stress. This vague waxing and
waning go on and on with the dog never really getting fully sick but never staying well
either. Eventually, if the disease is not diagnosed, it can come to a head in a phenomenon
known as an Addisonian crisis. The animal collapses in shock due to an inability to adapt
to the caloric and circulatory requirements of stress. Blood sugar may drop dangerously
low. Potassium levels can soar and disrupt the heart. Heart rate slows and arrhythmias
result. The patient may not survive this episode.
About 30% of dogs with Addison's disease are diagnosed at the time of an
Addisonian crisis. Approximately 90% of the adrenal cortex must be nonfunctional before clinical signs are observed.
Making the Diagnosis
Because of the numerous symptoms associated with Addison's disease, Addison’s
disease has earned the medical nickname “The Great Imitator.” The symptoms can occur
in combination, and as a result, Addison's disease can emerge in many ways. Diagnosis is
the trickiest part of this story.
One would think that one could simply look for an increase in potassium and/or a drop in
sodium on a basic laboratory blood panel, but spot checks of electrolyte values like this
are not reliable enough to diagnose Addison's disease.
Shock
Veterinarians can be presented with a young animal in shock. There is usually no history
of trauma or toxic exposure so general treatment for shock is initiated. This consists of
rapid administration of fluids (usually Lactated Ringers solution, which has little potassium
and a moderate amount of sodium) plus some glucocorticoids. By coincidence, this also
happens to be similar to the specific treatment for Addison's disease so often the patient
simply recovers without the veterinarian really knowing why.
Imitating Kidney Disease
The blood panel often comes back showing elevations in the renal parameters (BUN and
creatinine), and, thus the elevated potassium is suggestive of acute renal failure, a
condition with an extremely poor prognosis. The veterinarian may become suspicious of
another diagnosis as the patient will respond well to fluid administration and most renal
failure patients do not respond as well.
Low Blood Sugar
Addison’s disease may present in more unusual ways. The inability to maintain normal
sugar levels (ultimately manifesting as a seizure disorder) may be strongly suggestive of
an insulin-secreting pancreatic tumor but before major abdominal surgery is planned, it is
important to test for Addison’s disease.
Megaesophagus or Recurring GI Disease
In a similarly unexpected way, regurgitation of undigested food due to abnormal nerve
function in the esophagus (a condition called megaesophagus) can be caused ultimately
by Addison’s disease. Megaesophagus has many causes, but it is important not to forget
Addison's disease. Of course, Addison's disease can also manifest with chronic

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Addison's Disease (Hypoadrenocorticism) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951484&ind=218&objTypeID=1007 2/4
waxing/waning diarrhea and/or poor appetite, which would suggest a gastrointestinal
problem such as inflammatory bowel disease. Before investing in the expense and
potential anesthetic risk for endoscopy and intestinal biopsy, a screening test to rule out
Addison's disease is prudent.
Sorting it out with the ACTH Stimulation Test
Your veterinarian may use a resting cortisol test to rule out Addison's but the only
definitive test for Addison's disease is the ACTH stimulation test. The patient receives a
dose of ACTH, the pituitary hormone responsible for the release of corticosteroids in times
of stress. A normal animal will show an elevation in cortisol in response to ACTH, while an
Addisonian will have no corticosteroids with which to respond. This lack of response is
diagnostic for Addison's disease; however, a false positive may be obtained if
corticosteroids have been used in the treatment of the crisis before the test. Of all the
commonly used corticosteroids, only dexamethasone does not interfere with the assay for
cortisol; if any other steroid has been used, the test will not be valid for at least a couple of
days. It is possible to screen for Addison's disease with a single cortisol level. If the level is
over 2.0 mg/dl, Addison's disease can be crossed off the list, but if it is lower, an ACTH
Stim test will still be needed.
Treatment
The most important aspect of treatment for hypoadrenocorticism is replacing the missing
mineralocorticoid hormones. One way to do this is with oral fludrocortisone (brand name
Florinef®). Fludrocortisone is given twice a day at a dose determined by the patient's
sodium and potassium blood tests. At first, these electrolytes are monitored weekly. When
levels seem stable, these blood tests are repeated two to four times per year. Often with
time, it will be found that the fludrocortisone dose needed will increase. This increase is
unfortunate as the medication is relatively expensive. Since fludrocortisone has
glucocorticoid activity as well as mineralocorticoid activity, only 50% of patients need to
receive additional glucocorticoids. Using a compounding pharmacy or looking into the cost
of generic fludrocortisone may be helpful in managing the costs of this particular
medication, especially in a larger dog.
Another way to treat this condition is with an injectable medication called DOCP
desoxycorticosterone pivalate, (brand names Percorten-V or Zycortal®). This treatment is
given approximately every 25 days. Electrolytes are measured prior to injections at first
but testing can usually eventually be tapered to once or twice a year. There is some
feeling among experts that DOCP produces better regulation of electrolytes than oral
Florinef. Dogs on DOCP, however, do require glucocorticoid supplementation (such as a
low dose of prednisone).
What is Atypical Addison's Disease?
Most dogs become Addisonian when they lose the ability to produce both
mineralocorticoids and glucocorticoids. They need both types of hormones replaced. It
turns out that there is a subset of Addisonian dogs that are able to control their
sodium/potassium imbalance and only the glucocorticoids need to be supplemented.
These patients have what is called atypical Addison's disease. They can have all of the
symptoms of typical Addison's as described above (chronic relapsing diarrhea/appetite
loss, low blood sugar crisis etc.) but not the electrolyte abnormalities. Treatment is
supplementing with glucocorticoid hormones, such as prednisone.
It was previously thought that these patients experienced only partial damage to their
adrenal cortex and that is why they did not suffer full Addison's symptoms. More recently,
however, it has been discovered that the atypical Addison's patients actually do have as
much adrenal cortex damage as the typical Addison's patients; they have just found other
ways to manage their sodium and potassium. Most atypical Addison's patients progress to
the typical form, which means they will eventually need more aggressive treatment with

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Addison's Disease (Hypoadrenocorticism) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951484&ind=218&objTypeID=1007 3/4
fludrocortisone acetate tablets or desoxycorticosterone pivalate (DOCP) injections. The
current recommendation is to monitor sodium and potassium levels every couple of
months in atypical patients to watch for the switch to the typical (and more serious) form of
Addison's disease.
What is Secondary Addison's Disease?
Addison’s disease is most often caused by the destruction of the adrenal glands. In some
cases, the problem is a failure of the pituitary gland. ACTH is a hormone made by the
pituitary that tells the adrenal glands to produce and release more glucocorticoids.
Without ACTH, the adrenal glands atrophy and stop producing glucocorticoids. Measuring
the hormone ACTH in the blood can distinguish adrenal and pituitary failure. This is not
simply of academic interest. A patient with secondary Addison’s disease (i.e., pituitary
failure) will never progress to typical Addison’s disease and does not require long-term,
periodic monitoring of electrolytes.
What is Pacific Rimism?
Dog breeds originating in the Pacific Rim, such as the Akita and Shiba Inu, commonly
have elevated potassium levels on blood tests. This can be confusing when a patient has
symptoms that suggest Addison's. These patients will have normal ACTH stimulation test
results if they do not have Addison's disease.
Whipworm Infection?
Whipworm infection has been known to create a syndrome nearly identical to Addisonian
crisis, complete with abnormal sodium and potassium values. These patients will have
normal ACTH stimulation tests, but because whipworms only periodically shed eggs, fecal
testing may not detect whipworm infection. If there is any question about whipworm
infection, treatment should be instituted.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951484&pid=19239
c479e8ef-dc0d-4c11-ace3-a53ab7011d18.1754157956
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Addison's Disease (Hypoadrenocorticism) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951484&ind=218&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's Disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 24, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Let's assume an adrenal tumor has been
confirmed with either blood testing,
imaging, or both. Two questions must be
answered next:
Is the tumor benign or malignant?
Should you choose surgical
treatment or medical
management?
Benign vs. Malignant
While only approximately 15% of canine
Cushing’s syndrome patients have
adrenal tumors, half of them will have
benign tumors and half will have
malignant ones. The choice of therapy
may well depend on which one the patient
has.
If imaging has not yet been performed,
this is the time to do so. Chest
radiographs will be important as
malignant adrenal tumors tend to spread
to the chest. If such spread is seen, the tumor can be assumed to be malignant. Absence
of such findings, however, does not mean the tumor is benign. Ultrasound of the
abdomen, if this has not already been done, (or even CT scanning, MRI imaging, or
nuclear medicine scanning) will be needed to determine the size of the tumor, and to
check for invasion of local abdominal tissues (especially in the liver).
Between evaluation of the chest and the abdomen, it may be possible to non-invasively
determine if the tumor is malignant. It should be noted that the absence of tumor spread
does not mean that the tumor is benign. If there is obvious spread to other organs,
medical management is the only meaningful hope for the patient. Discuss with your
veterinarian whether a referral to an oncologist for the most current medication plan is in
your pet's best interest.
What if Imaging Fails to Confirm That the Tumor Is Malignant?
As mentioned, it is not possible to say that the tumor is benign simply because tumor
spread has not been detected. Still, no evidence of spread is about as close to
determining that the tumor is benign as we can get without actually obtaining tissue
samples. If the adrenal tumor is benign, there is an excellent chance for complete
recovery if the tumor is surgically removed. The smaller the tumor, the easier the surgery,
though the surgery involves delicate tissue in a difficult area.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951494&ind=219&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
What if Imaging Indicates the Tumor Is Malignant?
If there is obvious tumor spread, surgery may be too risky. The decision to proceed with
medical therapy will depend on how debilitated the patient is, and the degree of tumor
spread versus the severity of the clinical signs of Cushing's disease. Relief, but not cure,
of the clinical signs may be achieved by removing part of the tumor. Medical management
with trilostane or with high doses of lysodren would be fair alternatives.
What You Should Know About Surgery
Removing the adrenal gland is a relatively difficult surgery and may be best left
to board surgeons who perform this surgery with some regularity. (The adrenal
gland is located between the aorta, which is the body's largest artery; the renal
artery and vein, which are the sole blood supply to the kidney; and the
phrenicoabdominal artery. This vascular area is half-jokingly referred to by
surgeons as the Bermuda triangle. Surgery here is not for the inexperienced.)
Removing an adrenal tumor is generally considered to be one of the most
difficult surgeries in veterinary practice.
Risk of bleeding is higher for larger tumors, especially if they are malignant and
have invaded local structures. It is quite possible that the full extent of such
invasion will not be apparent prior to surgery.
Animals with Cushing's syndrome
have poor healing ability and tend to
have high blood pressure. Several
months of medical therapy (i.e.,
lysodren or trilostane) prior to
surgery may be a good means to
strengthen the patient, especially if
the tumor is believed to be benign.
The dog's natural cortisone
mechanisms will have been
suppressed by the tumor. This
suppression means the patient will
not be able to produce adrenal
steroids on their own for a while and
they will need to be given as
medications. Several months of
prednisone will likely be required at home. Some patients require florinef as an
additional supplement. ACTH stimulation test are used to monitor the need for
medication.
Adrenal tissue is notoriously difficult for pathologists to grade as benign or
malignant. It is possible that a tumor initially graded as benign will later turn out
to be malignant.
In a statistical survey of 63 dogs undergoing surgery for adrenal tumors:
6% (4) had inoperable tumors and were euthanized on the surgery table.
29% (18) died either in surgery or shortly thereafter due to complications.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951494&ind=219&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Laparoscopic surgical equipment. Photo courtesy
of Wikipedia Commons.
The most common serious complication is
thromboembolism (abnormal blood clots),
which typically happens in the first 24
hours after surgery. This risk is
tremendously reduced if the surgery can
be performed by laparoscopy. Incisions
are smaller, organ manipulation and
bleeding is less and recovery is faster.
Laparoscopy uses several small holes in
the belly wall through which instruments,
including a small video camera, can be
inserted. Surgery takes place inside the
belly and is viewed on a video screen or through a lens.
Medical Therapy for the Adrenal Tumor
As can be seen from the above discussion, adrenalectomy is a high-risk surgery. It may
not be a good choice for an elderly debilitated patient, especially if the tumor is large or
has evidence of spread. Further, a 24-hour specialty center is usually needed for this
sophisticated procedure and these centers may not be accessible, plus there is a great
deal of expense involved in a surgical adventure of this magnitude. For these reasons,
medical management may be selected as an alternative.
Lysodren is a chemotherapy drug that is able to erode the cortisol-producing layers of the
adrenal gland. This ability has made lysodren, for decades the traditional medication for
treating pituitary Cushing’s disease, helpful in treating adrenal tumors as well. It turns out
the adrenal tumors will respond to higher doses, The higher doses needed to control
adrenal tumors tend to produce more lysodren reactions than are seen when treating
pituitary tumors. The average survival time for this type of therapy is 16 months.
Trilostane can also be used for functioning adrenal tumors though it will not actually
diminish adrenal tissue (which could potentially diminish the tumor). Trilostane acts by
inactivating excess steroid hormones and thereby managing the symptoms of Cushing's
disease. You would think that this would not be effective since it does not directly affect
the tumor, but at least one study showed a comparable survival time to that of patients on
lysodren. As with lysodren, a protocol is needed that is different from those using the
same drugs to treat pituitary-dependent Cushing's disease.
Something Different: Hypofractionated Stereotactic Radiotherapy
A study presented in 2014 by a group of Italian researchers treated 12 dogs with
adrenal tumors with this special type of radiotherapy and all 12 of them responded.
After 12 months, 11 patients were not only still alive but their Cushing's syndromes
were controlled as well (the 12th patient had died of unrelated causes). This type of
therapy was considered to be far less risky than surgery and the researchers
recommended further investigation. Stereotactic radiotherapy involves highly
specialized equipment and is not readily available but might be worth travel
depending on where it might be located. An oncologist should be consulted for more
information.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951494&ind=219&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951494&pid=19239
c479e8ef-dc0d-4c11-ace3-a53ab7011d18.1754157981
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951494&ind=219&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Canine Hypoadrenocorticism – What Every Owner Should
Know
Ellen N. Behrend, VMD, PhD, DACVIM (SAIM)
Published: November 09, 2024
What is Hypoadrenocorticism?
The adrenal glands are small, paired glands
next to the kidneys that produce several
hormones that regulate a variety of body
functions necessary to sustain life.
Hypoadrenocorticism (previously called
Addison’s disease) is characterized by
reduced to absent adrenal gland function.
Cortisol, commonly called cortisone or
simply “steroid,” is the most widely known
hormone. It is needed by every cell in the
body and is essential to protein, fat, and
carbohydrate metabolism and maintaining a
healthy intestinal tract. The term steroid is
confusing as it can be used to describe other
compounds that can be taken to build
muscle.
The adrenal glands also produce another hormone called aldosterone, which regulates
sodium, potassium, and water balance. Patients with aldosterone deficiency can become
dehydrated and develop low sodium concentrations, high potassium concentrations,
and/or low blood pressure. A patient that doesn’t produce enough cortisol and, especially,
aldosterone will become unwell. Hypoadrenocorticism can be life-threatening.
Different Types of Hypoadrenocorticism
Dogs can be deficient in cortisol and aldosterone. Gastrointestinal signs are usually
present, along with low sodium (hyponatremia) and high potassium (hyperkalemia). This
form has previously been called typical Addison’s disease. Currently, the preferred term is
hyponatremic, hyperkalemic hypoadrenocorticism.
The other form occurs when only cortisol is deficient. Because aldosterone is unaffected,
sodium and potassium remain normal. It is called eunatremic, eukalemic
hypoadrenocorticism (previously called atypical Addison’s disease).
What Causes Hypoadrenocorticism?
A little physiology is needed to understand the causes of hypoadrenocorticism.
The pituitary gland, which is part of the brain, controls cortisol secretion. If the pituitary
gland is not functioning, cortisol secretion from the adrenal glands stops. Therefore,
damage to the pituitary or the adrenals can cause cortisol deficiency. Aldosterone
deficiency is caused only by damage to the adrenals, not to the pituitary.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Canine Hypoadrenocorticism – What Every Owner Should Know - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=12367404&ind=220&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Often, the cause of the pituitary no longer functioning is not known. Possible causes are
destruction by a tumor or head trauma. The most common cause of adrenal gland
destruction is when the patient’s own immune system attacks and destroys the adrenal
glands, i.e., autoimmune disease.
Other possible causes are destruction of the adrenal glands by tumor or infection or the
use of certain drugs, e.g., trilostane (Vetoryl) or mitotane. The cause may not be known in
any particular case. Also, the administration of drugs like hydrocortisone, prednisone, or
dexamethasone can temporarily cause the adrenals to stop secreting cortisol.
If hypoadrenocorticism occurs due to drug administration, it may be temporary. In all other
cases, it will be permanent and require lifelong care.
Clinical Signs of Hypoadrenocorticism
Clinical signs can be acute and life-threatening or chronic, vague, and not very specific.
Signs often involve the gastrointestinal tract: depression, vomiting, weight loss, and
diarrhea, which can be bloody. Increased thirst and urination can also occur. These signs
may come and go, and often, your pet will improve with non-specific, symptomatic, and
supportive care. If your dog experiences recurrent lethargy, diarrhea, vomiting, and
increased thirst/urination, hypoadrenocorticism should be considered.
Hypoadrenal Crisis
Some dogs with hypoadrenocorticism will experience sudden weakness,
vomiting, diarrhea, and collapse. This is a Hypoadrenal Crisis and is
considered a medical emergency. Urgent hospitalization and supportive
treatment will likely be necessary. Delaying treatment can be fatal.
In summary, the common signs of hypoadrenocorticism are:
Loss of appetite
Lethargy
Weakness
Vomiting
Diarrhea
Weight loss
Shivering, tremors, muscle stiffness
Depression
Dehydration
Since these signs are seen in many other diseases, diagnosis may not be straightforward.
Hypoadrenocorticism is called “the great pretender” because it looks like so many other
diseases.
Diagnosing
Hypoadrenocorticism is usually suspected based on a dog’s age, breed, and clinical
signs. This is a disease of younger to middle-aged dogs. Common dog breeds with
hypoadrenocorticism include:
Standard Poodles,
Labradoodle,
Goldendoodle,
Portuguese Water Dogs,
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling Retrievers, and
Bearded Collies.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Canine Hypoadrenocorticism – What Every Owner Should Know - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=12367404&ind=220&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Your veterinarian will perform a thorough physical examination and a series of blood tests
to help confirm the diagnosis. One way to rule out hypoadrenocorticism is to measure a
single cortisol concentration. If the concentration is high enough, a diagnosis of
hypoadrenocorticism can be eliminated in a relatively inexpensive way. If the cortisol is not
high enough to rule out hypoadrenocorticism, an ACTH stimulation test is needed. This
test requires injecting the hormone ACTH and two or three blood samples taken over one
to two hours. Additional tests, such as X-rays or abdominal ultrasound, may be performed
to help exclude other causes of your pet’s clinical signs.
Treatment and Quality of Life
Once diagnosed, most dogs can be successfully treated with oral and/or injectable
medications, and they resume normal lives.
In the beginning, all patients with hypoadrenocorticism are put on therapy to replace
cortisol, i.e., daily oral prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or hydrocortisone.
Doses can be altered to make sure the clinical signs of hypoadrenocorticism have
resolved and to minimize the side effects of the medication, the most common of which is
excess drinking and urination.
Aldosterone can be replaced either with daily oral medication (Florinef® or fludrocortisone,
given twice daily; hereafter called just “Florinef®”), or with a monthly injection of
Percorten®or Zycortal®. The effectiveness of these three drugs is determined by the
normalization of blood sodium and potassium concentrations.
The starting dose of Florinef® is often lower than most dogs need, and the dose is
increased to normalize sodium and potassium. On the contrary, the dose of Percorten®
and Zycortal® is often more than most dogs need, and the dose is decreased until the
lowest dose needed is determined.
Generally, veterinarians believe that Percorten® and Zycortal® are better options than
Florinef®. In some dogs, despite continued dose increases, sodium and potassium
concentrations never become normal on Florinef®. In addition, Florinef® has some
cortisol-like activity, so it can cause the same side effects as prednisone.
It is very important to know that the treatment for hypoadrenocorticism will be
lifelong. Missing a dose of a medication can make a dog quite ill or can be fatal.
When a dog responds well to Florinef®, concurrent prednisone, prednisolone,
methylprednisolone, or hydrocortisone can be weaned down or off. However, a dog
receiving Percorten® or Zycortal® as aldosterone replacement will always require daily
prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or hydrocortisone in addition to those
injections.
The body normally secretes excess cortisol during times of stress. Since patients with
hypoadrenocorticism can’t secrete cortisol to help with stress, prednisone, prednisolone,
methylprednisolone, or hydrocortisone doses need to be increased during these times.
“Stress” can be anything from boarding to surgery and illness. If a dog is on Florinef® and
not on daily prednisone, prednisolone, methylprednisolone, or hydrocortisone, one of
these medications should be given during the period of stress.
In addition, it is a good idea that your veterinarian evaluates your dog every six months to
ensure appropriate stabilization and management of the disease. Performance of a
complete blood count, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis is recommended.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=12367404&pid=19239
19ab1587-7838-489c-9b88-ceaf97541a1b.1754158004

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Canine Hypoadrenocorticism – What Every Owner Should Know - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=12367404&ind=220&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:36 PM Canine Hypoadrenocorticism – What Every Owner Should Know - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=12367404&ind=220&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 17, 2023
Published: March 14, 2005
Most diabetic dogs will develop cataracts
and go blind. This FAQ is designed to
assist the owners of diabetic dogs in
knowing what to expect and to make
decisions regarding cataract surgery.
What Is a Cataract?
A cataract is an opacity in the lens of the
eye. The entire lens may be involved or
just a part of it. The patient will not be
able to see through the opacity.
Why Do Diabetic Dogs Get Cataracts?
The lens of the eye is round, hard, and
normally as clear as glass. Looking at the
lens, it is hard to believe it is a piece of
living tissue. The lens is suspended by
fibers that can adjust its position so that
one can focus vision. The lens is encased
in a capsule and depends on the fluids of
the eye for nutrients. The lens does not
receive a direct blood supply.
Normally, the lens absorbs glucose from
the eye fluids, using most of this for its own energy needs. Some of the excess is
converted to another sugar called sorbitol. When there is excess sugar in the eye fluids,
as in diabetes mellitus, there is excess sorbitol produced. Sorbitol pulls water into the
lens, which in turn disrupts lens clarity and causes the cataract. Fructose is also produced
from the excess glucose and also contributes to this water absorption.
Cataracts do not necessarily imply poor diabetic control. Even well-controlled dogs can
still get cataracts.
How Long Does It Take To Go Blind?
Generally, the cataract has matured, and the dog is blind in a matter of weeks.
Until recently, blindness in a diabetic dog was basically a foregone conclusion, but there is
a new product called Kinostat® that has changed that outlook. To review, the lens absorbs
glucose from the fluids of the eye and uses this glucose as nutrition. Any extra glucose
that is absorbed into the lens is converted to sorbitol by an enzyme called aldose
reductase. Sorbitol pulls water into the lens to prevent the lens from becoming
dehydrated. This is all well and good, but in the diabetic state, there is lots of excess
glucose, and the excess glucose gets converted to excess sorbitol, which, in turn, pulls so

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952222&ind=221&objTypeID=1007 1/5
A mature cataract. Image
Courtesy of Dr. Rhea Morgan.
A mature cataract. Image Courtesy of Dr. Jane Bondt
much water into the lens that clarity and function are disrupted, and a cataract is formed.
Kinostat is an aldose reductase inhibitor that curtails sorbitol production. Early use of
Kinostat may significantly delay or even completely prevent the development of cataracts.
Kinostat is preventive only and will not reverse cataract formation that has already
occurred. Kinostat is unfortunately not yet commercially available, though has been
reportedly near coming to market for some time.
What Does It Mean To Say That a Cataract Is Mature?
A cataract’s maturity is determined by how much visual
impairment the pet is believed to have. Since we cannot ask a
dog to read an eye chart, we must determine this by visually
inspecting the eye. A light is used to look into the eye and view
the colorful area at the back of the eye called the tapetum. (This
is the area that flashes or appears colored in certain lighting.)
When less than 10 percent of the tapetum is obstructed, the
cataract is very young and does not significantly change
vision. When 10-50 percent of the tapetum is obstructed, this
cataract is called early immature. When 51-99 percent is
obstructed the cataract is late immature. The mature cataract obstructs the entire
tapetum. Ideally, a cataract is removed in the early immature stage for the lowest surgical
complication rate.
When a cataract is hypermature, it starts to
liquefy and dissolve. This can actually lead to
restoring vision, which sounds like a positive
turn of events; unfortunately, the dissolution
process is quite inflammatory. The resulting
inflammation can be painful and can damage
the eye even more.
All cataracts do not progress all the way to
hypermature and may stay static or progress
at changing rates; however, diabetic
cataracts are notorious for reaching
hypermaturity and creating inflammation.
What Is Uveitis?
Uveitis is inflammation of the eye's uveal
tract, which consists of the eye's vascular tissues. In this situation, uveitis is the
inflammation that results when the hypermature cataract begins to liquefy. Uveitis is
painful and tends to cause the eye to become reddened and the pupil to constrict. When a
pet has uveitis before surgery, success (pain-free vision) occurs in only 50 percent of
cases 6 months after surgery as opposed to 95 percent of cases for whom there was no
uveitis pre-operatively.
Can My Dog's Vision Be Restored?
Maybe. It depends on the health of the eye, excluding the cataract. If the only thing wrong
with the eye is the cataract and the patient's diabetes mellitus is well-regulated, surgery
can remove the cataract and place an artificial lens. If the eye is deeply inflamed or is
otherwise damaged, the eye may be blind even without a cataract. A veterinary
ophthalmologist can evaluate the eye to determine the feasibility of cataract surgery.
It is important to note that there are numerous eye drops advertised that claim to dissolve
cataracts. None of these products actually work and wasting time with them may actually
allow uveitis to set in and make for a much worse prognosis for vision.
Is it Cruel To Keep a Dog Blind?

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952222&ind=221&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Illustration by Tamara Rees of VIN.
Not at all. Dogs do not depend on vision the way humans do. A blind dog can get along
very well as long as the furniture isn’t moved and the dog is properly supervised.
For tips on helping a blind dog adapt:
Blind Dog Support
There are many medical conditions that render a dog blind and as long as the condition is
not painful, the dog can live a normal life as a successful and happy pet.
Cataract Surgery: What Is The First Step?
The first step is a consultation with your regular veterinarian. Your dog’s diabetes must be
well-regulated before surgery is considered. If pre-operative lab tests show nothing to
preclude anesthesia, your veterinarian may refer you to a veterinary ophthalmologist, as
clinics do not usually have the specialized equipment necessary. A regular veterinarian is
not qualified to perform cataract surgery.
What Happens At The Ophthalmologist's?
It is necessary to determine if the eye is going to be visual after cataract surgery. There is,
after all, no point in performing this surgery if the eye is going to be blind anyway. The
most important test is called an ERG (an electroretinogram). This test checks the retina

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952222&ind=221&objTypeID=1007 3/5
for electrical activity, which indicates the eye should be able to see after the cataract is
removed.
In addition to the ERG, the ophthalmologist will check for uveitis. It should be treated
before surgery to minimize the inevitable inflammation after surgery.
What Kind of Surgical Procedures Are Done?
There are two types of surgery: lens extraction and phacoemulsification. With lens
extraction, the incision tends to be larger, the post-operative inflammation is greater, and
the potential for leaving bits of the lens behind is also greater.
With phacoemulsification, an ultrasonic instrument is used to liquefy the lens, and a sort of
vacuum cleaner sucks the lens away. This procedure is more difficult if the patient is older,
and the lens is thus harder in consistency. This method is preferred for diabetic patients.
After either surgery, an artificial lens is usually placed for optimal post-operative vision.
What Kind of After Care Is Needed?
The patient will need to wear an Elizabethan collar after surgery to protect the eye.
Cortisone eye drops are needed for probably several weeks. Oral anti-inflammatories will
be needed for weeks to months after. Drops to keep the pupil dilated will also be used.
What Kind of Complications Are Possible?
Complications to consider are:
Long-term uveitis (probably of most concern for diabetic patients)
Opacification of the lens capsule (usually correctable with a laser)
Corneal clouding (can be managed with 5 percent saline eye drops 4 to 6 times
daily)
Bleeding in the eye
Glaucoma
Retinal detachment (particularly if the cataract is hypermature)
Should Surgery Be Done On Both Eyes?
It is important to remember the old saying that the one-eyed man is king among the blind.
A dog need only have one cataract removed to have vision restored. Doing both eyes is
an option to discuss with the ophthalmologist, as some dogs need all the vision they can
get.
Cataract surgery requires committed patient care both in the hospital and at home. Your
veterinarian will be able to answer your questions or direct you to other appropriate
resources.
Related resources
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952222&ind=221&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952222&pid=19239
c479e8ef-dc0d-4c11-ace3-a53ab7011d18.1754158105
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952222&ind=221&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Dog Owner Survey
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
Alopecia Due To Cushing's
Photo by Dr. Murray Moffatt
Cushing’s Disease in Dogs (Hyperadrenocorticism): What
Is It?
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Revised: August 02, 2018
Published: October 06, 2003
Cushing’s disease, also called Cushing’s
syndrome or hyperadrenocorticism,
results from an overproduction of the
hormone cortisol. Cortisol is produced by
the adrenal glands, located next to the
kidneys, and adrenal glands are
stimulated to produce cortisol by the
pituitary gland located at the base of the
brain. There are two types of Cushing’s disease. In adrenal-dependent Cushing’s disease,
an adrenal gland overproduces cortisol because of an adrenal tumor. In pituitarydependent Cushing’s disease, the adrenal glands overproduce cortisol because they are
overstimulated by a pituitary tumor.
Signs associated with Cushing's disease
may include increased thirst and urination, a
voracious appetite, an enlarged and sagging
belly, hair loss, lethargy/weakness, panting,
and sometimes, recurrent infections.
Diagnosis
Cushing's disease can be difficult to
diagnose, especially in early cases. Tests
that may be needed to diagnose Cushing’s
disease include:
Complete blood count (CBC),
chemistry panel and urinalysis:
These blood and urine tests evaluate
the general health of your pet and
can help your veterinarian determine if other health problems should be
suspected.
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) stimulation test: This test involves a
blood sample, an injection of a hormone (ACTH), an hour of waiting, and then
another blood sample. This test is used to diagnose Cushing’s disease in a pet.
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test: This test takes longer to perform
than the ACTH stimulation test and takes place over 8 hours. It involves a blood
sample, an injection of a steroid, a few hours of waiting, another blood sample
at 3 hours, more waiting, and then another blood sample at 8 hours. This test is

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cushing’s Disease in Dogs (Hyperadrenocorticism): What Is It? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951983&ind=222&objTypeID=1007 1/2
used to diagnose Cushing’s disease. Sometimes this test can also determine
where the problem is in the pet’s body (i.e., pituitary or adrenal).
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test (HDDST): This test is similar to the
LDDST except that it uses a higher dose of dexamethasone. It is used to
determine where the problem is in the pet’s body (i.e. pituitary or adrenal).
Endogenous adrenocorticotrophic (ACTH) assay, or ACTH level: This test
involves a single blood sample. It is used to determine where the problem is in
the pet’s body (i.e. pituitary or adrenal).
Radiographs, abdominal ultrasound, or CT scan: Radiographs can help us see
changes in other organs that could indicate Cushing’s. An abdominal
ultrasound can help us see the adrenal glands. Sometimes, a CT scan can be
performed to help us evaluate the pituitary gland at the base of the brain.
Treatment
Treatment consists of medication to control the cortisol overproduction by the adrenal
gland or surgery to remove the abnormal adrenal gland. Choosing the best treatment for a
pet with Cushing’s disease depends upon where the problem is in your pet's body (i.e.
pituitary or adrenal gland).
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951983&pid=19239
638a8972-7985-40fd-a665-d94be3fcbdc2.1754158128
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:38 PM Cushing’s Disease in Dogs (Hyperadrenocorticism): What Is It? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951983&ind=222&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 19, 2017
Published: January 01, 2001
This condition represents a classical
excess in cortisone-type hormone
circulation in the body; it's a relatively
common hormone imbalance. Both cats
and dogs can be affected (though it is
primarily a dog's disease) and the onset is
insidious.
Cushing's syndrome is the resulting set of
symptoms observed when the body is
exposed to excess cortisone (or related
hormones) over a long period of time.
Cortisol (called hydrocortisone when used
as a medication) is a hormone produced
by the adrenal glands that are located
atop the kidneys. Cortisol is stored in the
adrenal glands and is released in times of
stress where it helps our bodies prepare
for a fight or flight situation. It adjusts the
metabolism to expect physical exertion by
mobilizing fat and sugar stores and
retaining sodium and water. It puts us in a
state of break down so that our stored
resources can be used quickly. However,
if the body is exposed to this hormone most of the time instead of during short stressful
periods only, the state of break down becomes debilitating.
There are several mechanisms that can lead to Cushing's syndrome and, as they are
treated differently, it is important to determine which one is at work in a given animal.

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951495&ind=223&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Graphic by MarVistaVet

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951495&ind=223&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Graphic by MarVistaVet
In the normal body, the pituitary gland, located at the base of the brain, can detect when
cortisol levels in the blood are declining. In response, the pituitary secretes a stimulating
substance, called ACTH, which causes the adrenal gland to release more cortisol. When
the pituitary gland detects that cortisol levels are again appropriate, it stops its stimulatory
message.
You can think of the pituitary gland as a thermostat for cortisol, though the pituitary gland
regulates many other hormones as well. This raising and lowering of cortisol blood level is
regulated throughout the day via ACTH secretion and occurs rapidly.
Pituitary-Dependent Cushing's Syndrome
This form of Cushing's disease accounts for 85% of dogs with Cushing's syndrome.
Basically, the pituitary gland grows a small tumor. The tumor is generally too small to
cause any trouble due to its size and it is generally a benign tumor. This tumor, however,
over-produces ACTH, thus leading to over-stimulation and enlargement of both adrenal
glands and an over-production of cortisone. Occasionally (10% of pituitary-dependent
Cushing's dogs), these benign pituitary tumors are large enough to compress the brain. In
these cases, neurological signs may be observed; these cases are unusual but very hard
to treat (see section on macrotumors.)
Graphic by MarVistaVet

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951495&ind=223&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Adrenal-Dependent Cushing's Syndrome
In 15% of dogs with Cushing's syndrome, an adrenal tumor is directly over-producing
cortisone. The tumor is often large enough to see with radiographs or ultrasound and may
be malignant. There is very little or no production of ACTH from the pituitary gland and as
a result the opposite adrenal gland is usually atrophied/small.
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Overuse of Cortisone-Type Hormones
Cortisone derivatives may be the most widely utilized drugs in veterinary medicine. A
single corticosteroid medication can be used to treat a multitude of completely different
diseases simply by using different dosing schedules. Steroids are commonly used to
relieve inflammation particularly in skin allergies, arthritis pain, lung disease and more.
Relief is usually rapid and many owners find themselves requesting cortisone shots or
pills over and over again. In time, Cushing's syndrome can result, not from any inherent
disease in the pet's system but from the effects of the hormones given over the long term.
The pituitary gland perceives the high steroid levels yielded by the medication and does
not send stimulation to the adrenal glands. In time, the adrenal glands atrophy and are not
able to release cortisone on their own should they be required to do so. This effect lasts
as long as a period of three months after the cortisone medication has been discontinued.
To allow the adrenal to gradually recover, cortisone pills are usually prescribed in a
decreasing dose, rather than a sudden stoppage; an owner should never discontinue the
pills suddenly.
Commonly prescribed cortisone derivatives include: Vetalog, Azium,
prednisone/prednisolone, dexamethasone, Depo-Medrol, triamcinolone,
methylprednisolone, Medrol™ and others. These medications have important parts to play
in medicine but they must be respected and not used indiscriminately, nor discontinued
suddenly after prolonged use.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951495&ind=223&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951495&pid=19239
c479e8ef-dc0d-4c11-ace3-a53ab7011d18.1754158150
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951495&ind=223&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 24, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
Adrenal or Pituitary Cushing's? Why do we
Care?
Once a pet has been confirmed as having
Cushing's syndrome, the next step is to
determine which form of Cushing's
syndrome the pet has since treatment and
prognosis are different for each form. As
described, there are two forms, commonly
abbreviated PDH and AT. PDH stands for
pituitary dependent hyperadrenocorticism
and accounts for 85 percent of canine and
feline Cushing's patients. In PDH, there is
a pituitary tumor, often extremely small,
causing over stimulation of the adrenal
glands. AT simply stands for adrenal
tumor. Adrenal tumors can be benign or
malignant. Testing to determine the type
or form of Cushing's disease is called
discriminatory testing. This type of testing
is done AFTER the diagnosis of Cushing's
disease has already been made. Here are
some issues and concerns where the type
of Cushing's disease the pet has becomes an important matter.
If there is an adrenal tumor, there is a 50 percent chance that it is malignant. It
is helpful to know if the pet has a condition with this kind of a malignancy rate,
especially if surgery is being considered.
If the patient is known to have an adrenal tumor, this knowledge will direct the
doctor on how and where to look for tumor spread to determine if the patient
has cancer or not. On the other hand, if the patient is known to have a pituitary
tumor, it becomes more relevant to image the brain to look for evidence of
pressure on the brain.
Medication protocols may be very different for adrenal tumors versus pituitary
tumors.
Surgery protocols are completely different for adrenal tumors versus pituitary
tumors.

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951504&ind=224&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Image courtesy Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
Approximately 85 percent of Cushing's patients will have pituitary dependent disease
while approximately 15 percent will have adrenal tumors. This statistic appears to be valid
in dogs as well as cats.
Dogs
What Tests will Tell us What Type of
Cushing's Syndrome the Dog Has?
The Low Dose Dexamathasone
Suppression Test
If you are lucky, the same test used to
determine if a pet has Cushing's disease
can also classify the Cushing's disease so
that no further tests are needed. To get the
information needed, a 4-hour sample is
drawn in addition to the predexamethasone sample and the 8-hour
sample. If the cortisol level suppresses to a
level below 50% of baseline at 4 hours,
only to escape to a level high enough to
indicate a positive result, only a pituitary
tumor is possible. While pituitary tumors do
not always show this kind of classic
suppression at four hours, adrenal tumors
never do. If suppression is seen in the 4-hour sample, further testing is not needed,
though this is the only pattern that is distinctive enough to obviate further testing.
Approximately, 60 percent of patients with pituitary tumors can be identified with the low
dose dexamethasone suppression test.
The High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
This test is similar to the low dose dexamethasone suppression test except that a higher
dose of dexamethasone is used and the patient has already been diagnosed with
Cushing's. The idea behind is that a patient with a pituitary tumor will show suppression in
circulating cortisol when exposed to the high dose of dexamethasone; suppression does
not occur with the low dose. If there is an adrenal tumor, suppression does not occur.
Unfortunately, the theory does not hold well enough to make this a reliable test; a full 20 to
30 percent of pituitary tumors will fail to suppress even with the high dose of
dexamethasone. Furthermore, this test cannot identify patients with adrenal tumors; it is
able to confirm about 70 to 80 percent of patients with pituitary disease. The rest will need
further testing.
Endogenous ACTH Level
Many veterinarians feel this is the most accurate method of classifying Cushing's
syndrome, but the problem is that the test is technically challenging to run. Serum from
the patient must be frozen when transported to the laboratory and must not thaw. The
hormone ACTH is fragile and may not survive the trip to the lab. The idea with this test is
that a patient with a pituitary tumor will have high ACTH levels, as this is what the tumor is
secreting. A patient with low or no measurable ACTH levels has an adrenal tumor as the
pituitary is trying its best not to stimulate the over-active adrenal tumor.
Imaging
Fundamental to discerning pituitary dependent from adrenal tumor is the size and shape
of the adrenal glands. With pituitary dependent disease, both adrenal glands are being
over stimulated so they should both be symmetrical in size and shape and most likely
enlarged. With an adrenal tumor, one gland will be severely atrophied and possibly
undetectable, while the other is enlarged and possibly misshapen. This difference makes
imaging of the adrenal glands an accurate way to distinguish types of Cushing's

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951504&ind=224&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Image courtesy of Dr. Teri Ann
Oursler
syndrome. Ultrasound, MRI, or CT scan can be used, however, ultrasound is the most
readily available and least costly. In one study, ultrasound was able to correctly identify
adrenal tumors in 86 percent of cases. Sedation is generally not needed for abdominal
ultrasound, whereas CT and MRI require general anesthesia and usually needs referral to
a specialty clinic.
An added benefit of imaging includes looking for evidence of malignancy should an
adrenal tumor be identified. Malignant tumors tend to invade the vena cava, the largest
vein in the body. Ultrasound has been found to be extremely accurate in evaluating for this
complication. Imaging also allows for taking measurements of the adrenal glands. Glands
that measure greater than 4 cm in length are highly suspicious of being malignant.
It is important to note that ultrasound can never be used to make the initial diagnosis of
Cushing's syndrome as there is too much variability in the size of normal adrenal glands.
When it comes to gaining information, imaging is best used on patients already known to
have Cushing's syndrome for whom classification is needed.
Is it Reasonable to Play the Odds and not do Further Testing?
Since 85 percent of canine patients with Cushing's have a pituitary tumor, it is not
unreasonable to play the odds and treat for a pituitary tumor. The risks in doing so is that if
the patient doesn't readily respond to medication, it will be impossible to know if the dose
simply needs adjustment or if the patient has an adrenal tumor and a completely different
treatment is needed. A great deal of time and effort could be wasted by pursuing the
wrong therapy.
Cats
For a cat with Cushing's, the methods that can be reliably
used to distinguish pituitary from adrenal disease are: high
dose dexamethasone suppression testing; endogenous
ACTH; and imaging.
High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
The feline high dose dexamethasone suppression test is the
same as the canine version except that even higher doses
must be used. If the cortisol levels suppress in response to
injected dexamethasone, then only a pituitary tumor is
possible. If the cortisol levels do not suppress, however, then
no conclusion can be drawn as 50 percent of feline pituitary
tumors will not suppress. This can be a frustrating situation but
since the test is non-invasive, it is worth a try to confirm a
pituitary tumor in this way.
Endogenous ACTH
As with dogs, this test is accurate in distinguishing pituitary-dependent from adrenal
Cushing's syndrome, but the problem is transport and sample stability. ACTH is a delicate
hormone and the sample must be frozen all the way to the lab with no thawing out. The
idea is that the patient with pituitary disease will have a high level of ACTH while the
adrenal patient will have none or very little. Obviously, if there is a transport problem the
results can falsely indicate an adrenal tumor when there isn't one.
Imaging
When it comes to using imaging to distinguish pituitary from adrenal Cushing's syndrome,
the rules for cats are the same as for dogs. A cat with pituitary disease will have both
adrenal glands approximately the same size, possibly both of them clearly larger than
what would be considered normal. If there is an adrenal tumor, one gland will be large (the
one with the tumor) while the other is very small (atrophied). Ultrasound is probably the
least invasive and least complicated method of distinguishing adrenal from pituitary
disease in cats and has the added benefit of screening for local tumor spread.

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951504&ind=224&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951504&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158171
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:39 PM Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951504&ind=224&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Flash Glucose Monitoring with
FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 24, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Take-Homes for Pet Diabetes:
Diabetes mellitus is caused by a
deficiency of insulin. You will
probably have to give insulin
injections to correct the
deficiency. (Don't worry. It's
easier than you think.)
The main symptoms of diabetes
mellitus are excessive urination,
excessive thirst, excessive
appetite, and weight loss.
Treatment should control these
symptoms. Watching for these
symptoms is the best way to
know how your pet is doing.
The starting insulin dose is going
to be based on averages and will
be tweaked based on trial and
error, depending on both test
results and control of the
symptoms.
You can save a lot of money if you get your own glucose meter and learn to
do blood sampling at home (it's easier than you think).
Using too little insulin is a problem in the long term, but too much insulin is
potentially an emergency in the short term. Be sure you know how to
recognize hypoglycemia and what to do about it. See Summary, below.
See Article Summary Below 
What is Diabetes Mellitus?

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 1/9
The pancreas is nestled along the stomach
and small intestine. It secretes digestive
enzymes into the small intestine but it
also secretes hormones into the
bloodstream to regulate blood sugar.
Graphic by MarVista Vet.
In order to understand the problems involved in diabetes mellitus it is necessary to
understand something of the normal body's sugar metabolism.
The cells of the body require fuel in the form of fat or sugar to conduct their daily activities.
Some tissues can use either sugar or fat depending on circumstances, and some tissues
(such as the brain and nervous system) depend almost exclusively on sugar as
fuel. Diabetes mellitus mostly involves the metabolism of sugar (in particular, a sugar
known as glucose), so we will focus on the sugar part of the situation. Glucose comes
from the diet in the form of starches and sugars that we eat.
Tissues cannot absorb glucose without a hormone known as insulin. Insulin is produced
by the pancreas as part of the body's natural blood sugar regulation. Insulin can be
considered to be a key that unlocks the door, allowing sugar in the bloodstream to enter
the body’s cells. Once inside the tissues, glucose can be burned for fuel or stored, but
without insulin, the sugar stays in the bloodstream and cannot be used by the body.
Ketones in urine for three days or more in a row warrant a visit to the veterinarian.
In a Diabetic Animal, There Isn't Enough Insulin
In fact, there may be no insulin at all. Remember that
insulin was the key to unlocking the cell so that glucose
could be brought inside. With no insulin, glucose
cannot get in. Not only is glucose not being taken in
and stored, but it is left floating around in the
bloodstream in extremely high amounts. The body's
tissues are starving and the bloodstream has plenty of
glucose to feed them, but without insulin, the glucose is
unavailable.
So What Symptoms Result from this?
Because there is no way to remove glucose from the
bloodstream, blood sugar levels are astronomically
high. Normally, the kidney is able to conserve the
bloodstream's glucose but its mechanisms are
overwhelmed and glucose spills into the urine in high
amounts. If we continue our food delivery analogy, all
the undeliverable food must be dumped. In the body,
glucose dumping happens in the kidney with extra glucose dumping in the urine. This
process involves the use of a lot of water with the ultimate result being a lot of urine being
produced to process all that glucose to dump. This translates into excessive thirst and
urination.
The tissues of the body are unable to access any of the glucose they need for fuel and are
basically starving. Fat is mobilized and muscle is broken down to help feed the tissues but
it does not do much good without insulin to bring fuel inside the cells. The patient shows
excessive appetite because his body is in a state of starvation. Because the body is
rapidly breaking itself down, weight loss is also a classic sign.
All the sugar in the urine provides a desirable growth medium for bacteria, and urinary
tract infection is a common finding in diabetes mellitus.
In diabetic dogs (but not cats), a specific type of cataract rapidly develops in the eye when
high amounts of glucose enter the lens. Glucose normally feeds the lens, but the amounts
of glucose coming into a lens in the diabetic state are much higher. Excess glucose is
converted to another sugar called sorbitol, which in turn attracts water. The excess water
disrupts the clarity of the lens, creating a diabetic cataract, which leads to blindness in
almost all diabetic dogs.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 2/9
Illustration by Wendy Brooks,
DVM
The main symptoms of diabetes mellitus are:
Excessive Thirst
Excessive Urination
Excessive Appetite
Weight Loss
Is it like Human Disease? Will We Need to Give Insulin Shots?
Dogs: Diabetes is most likely permanent and yes on the insulin shots.
Cats: Diabetes might not be permanent. Yes on the insulin shots if you want a chance at
remission.
Diabetes mellitus is a classical disease in humans and most of us have heard some of the
terms used to describe it. In humans, diabetes is broken down into two forms: Type I and
Type II. These are also referred to as juvenile-onset and adult-onset diabetes or insulindependent and non-insulin-dependent diabetes. In short, Type I is the type where the
pancreas produces no insulin at all, and Type II is the type where the pancreas produces
some but not enough. Many pet owners wonder if dogs and cats have similar categories
for their diseases.
Virtually all dogs have insulin-dependent diabetes and must be treated with insulin. There
is no way around it. Their condition is similar to the Type I diabetic human in many ways.
Most cats have "non-insulin-dependent diabetes" at least to
start. This suggests that some cats can get away without
insulin injections and, indeed, some cats may qualify for oral
options or temporary treatment with insulin. For cats,
diabetes can resolve if we can re-activate the pancreas
promptly.
Not all diabetic cats are similar to humans with Type II
diabetes. Some diabetic cats, perhaps as many as 25
percent, have more severe hormone issues, such as
acromegaly or Cushing's disease, that make them not only
insulin dependent but difficult to regulate.
Treatment: Giving Insulin by Injection
Since deficiency of insulin is the problem, it’s not surprising
that giving insulin is the solution. You will need to learn to
give injections, which is daunting to some owners at first, but
almost everyone quickly becomes an expert.
First, an insulin type and dose need to be selected. There are
several types of insulins and it is not possible to know
exactly how much insulin your individual pet will require; trial
and error is needed. Your veterinarian will make a guess
based on what works for other cats and dogs and what has
been reported in the literature. Most pets require injections
twice a day, approximately 12 hours apart, in conjunction with
a meal. Because an overdose of insulin is potentially an
emergency, it may be prudent to start with once-a-day insulin,
just in case. If you like, discuss the pros and cons of each
approach with your veterinarian.
Insulin has traditionally been given by syringe in a shot, but insulin pens are proving more
and more popular. The syringe method involves buying a box of syringes and a bottle of
insulin, drawing up a measured amount of insulin, and giving a shot. The pen involves

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 3/9
applying a needle tip to the pen, dialing a dose on the pen, sticking the tip into the pet's
skin, and pressing a button on the pen. Most people feel the pen method is much easier to
perform but it may be difficult to find needle tips that are long enough for pet use as pet
skin is much thicker than human skin. In some situations, the pen is used as a dispenser
for the syringe as the pen cartridges may be more cost-effective than bottles of insulin.
Without video or first-hand experience with insulin pens or syringes, it may be hard to
visualize the difference. See our section on insulin administration for more details. Not all
pet insulins are available in a pen format. Your veterinarian will instruct you
regarding options.
Some insulins are available from the neighborhood pharmacy and some are available only
through veterinary offices and veterinary pharmacies. Your veterinarian will either provide
you with supplies or will give you the necessary prescriptions. If you are using syringes
(instead of a pen) be sure the syringes and insulin concentration match. Insulin syringes
are marked in insulin units (either U-100 syringes for 100 unit/cc insulins or U-40 syringes
for 40 unit/cc insulins). Whenever you receive more supplies, always double-check these
numbers.
Never alter the insulin dose recommended by your doctor. To determine whether dose
adjustments (or even a different type of insulin would be more appropriate), the pet will
need a "glucose curve" where sugar levels are tracked over 10-24 hours. This can be
done either by testing glucose levels with a glucose meter every 2 hours or so or by using
a continuous monitor such as a FreeStyle Libre®. If a meter is used, it is best to test blood
glucose in the pet's own home and send the values to the vet but the curve can certainly
be performed in the vet's office. Note that stress and anxiety will alter blood glucose levels
which means that values obtained at home will be more representative of the pet's
situation.
Treatment: Oral Agents (Cats only)
Some cats will qualify for oral treatment of their diabetes. There are three medications that
might be employed for this: bexagliflozin, velagliflozin, and glipizide.
Bexagliflozin, an oral tablet medication, and velagliflozin, an oral solution (liquid), are
options for some cats with diabetes mellitus where insulin injections are not practical.
Both of these drugs increase the kidneys' ability to remove extra glucose from the
bloodstream, keeping blood sugar levels in check. Lower blood sugar levels allow the
pancreas to recover some and may alleviate many symptoms of diabetes. On the flip side,
only certain cats will qualify for use, and there is potential for some very serious side
effects. This includes diabetic ketoacidosis, a condition where insulin becomes so low that
blood sugar cannot be used well in the body’s cells. Following your veterinarian's
recommendations on proper monitoring is crucial.
Finally, glipizide is a human medication used to reduce glucose levels by causing the
pancreas' beta cells to actually produce insulin. In order for glipizide to have an effect,
healthy beta cells need to be present. Glipizide is not as effective as bexagliflozin or
velagliflozin in lowering blood glucose levels, so it does not include the intense monitoring
or the same risk for complications as the others do. It is typically used for borderline
patients or patients where insulin injections are simply not possible. Approximately 25% of
cats will respond to this medication.
The various insulin formulations have different storage requirements. Check with
your veterinarian for the proper storage of your pet’s prescribed insulin.
Diet and Feeding
Regulation can generally be worked out on whatever diet the pet is eating but there are
some diets and feeding strategies that are helpful. For dogs, high-fiber/low-fat diets are
preferred as they slow the absorption of sugars in the diet and help maintain a more

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 4/9
regulated blood sugar level. Fiber also seems to make the body's tissues more sensitive
to insulin which also helps with regulation. Rewards are often employed to facilitate the
insulin injection experience but these calories can add up and interfere with regulation so
be sure your veterinarian is aware of all food items. Diabetic dogs are best fed in two
meals, approximately 12 hours apart. After they have been seen to eat their food, their
insulin dose can be given.
For cats the strategy is different. First, cats seem to do best fed in multiple small meals
daily so they should be allowed access to food at all times. Second, the high protein/low
carbohydrate diets seem to be the most conducive to regulation. There are specific
prescription diets, both canned and dry, for diabetic cats.
Learn more details on handling diets and feeding for cats and dogs.
What about Home Glucose Testing?
Home glucose monitoring has many benefits: glucoses are monitored in the comfort of the
pet's own home without alterations from vet visit anxiety, a lot of money can be saved by
monitoring at home, and questions about glucose status can be quickly answered and
addressed. There are two ways to monitor glucoses at home: Continuous monitoring and
a glucose meter.
Continuous Monitoring
Continuous monitors have changed the way diabetic pets are monitored. A sensor with a
tiny needle is implanted in the pet and paired wirelessly to either a phone or a reader. It
reads tissue glucose levels constantly and reports its data to the device of your choice as
well as to an internet portal where your veterinarian can access it. The sensor setup lasts
up to 2 weeks and typically costs less than an in-house glucose curve run in the hospital.
This is a fantastic option when it is time to get get a glucose curve. If one simply wants to
spot-check a glucose level, one will need a glucometer and you will need to be able to
take a blood sample from your pet.
Glucometer/Glucose Monitoring
Many pet owners like to check glucose levels prior to insulin injections on a daily basis or
simply want the ability to check a glucose level if there is a concern for hypoglycemia. For
these situations, a glucometer is needed. Human meters can be obtained at any
drugstore, but we recommend getting a veterinary meter as the calibration is different.
AlphaTrak is a popular brand, but there are presently several other brands available.
The meter kit will contain measuring strips, solutions for calibration, and a spring-loaded
lancet device for taking blood samples (usually from the ear margin). For details, please
visit the Diabetes Monitoring section of this library. Taking single-drop blood samples turns
out to be easier than you might think, and video links are provided in the monitoring
section. Still, not every pet is amenable to blood sampling, and we do not want anyone
getting bitten or scratched.
If you choose to use a glucometer at home, be sure to keep a log of when your pet was
fed, when insulin was given, and what the glucose levels were that you found. (There are
many phone apps to assist with this). Bring this log to your veterinarian when you come
for checkups. Glucose levels obtained prior to the first insulin administration of the day are
particularly useful. Your veterinarian will also be particularly interested in signs associated
with poor regulation: excessive thirst, excessive urine production, excessive appetite, and
weight loss
See the insulin administration guide for cats.
Hypoglycemia and Other Things to Watch for

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 5/9
The most serious problem to watch for is hypoglycemia (low blood sugar). This results
from a mismatch in food consumption and insulin dose. If the dose is too high, you can get
hypoglycemia. If the pet doesn't eat, you can get hypoglycemia. Your pet may look simply
tired, weak, or sleepy. If she is roused, she will seem drunk or may not be able to fully
come to alertness. This can be an emergency and can progress to seizures, so it is good
to know what to do at home to prevent disaster.
If your pet appears wobbly or drunken, the blood sugar level may have dropped too low.
This occurs after an insulin overdose. First, try to get your pet to eat. If the pet will not eat,
administer light Karo syrup, honey, or even sugar water at a dose of one tablespoon per 5
pounds. If no improvement occurs, immediately see your veterinarian for emergency
treatment. When your pet is more stable, a glucose curve will be needed to determine why
this happened and what a more appropriate insulin dose might be.
It is best to make sure that your pet has recently eaten before giving the scheduled insulin
dose.
Other Reasons to Return to the Vet
Bring your pet in for a re-check exam and testing if you note any of the following:
the pet seems to feel ill.
the pet is losing weight.
the pet has a ravenous appetite or loses its appetite.
the pet seems to be drinking or urinating excessively.
the pet becomes disoriented or groggy.
It is important for diabetic pets to have their teeth cleaned annually. Dental tartar seeds
the body with bacteria and when blood sugar levels run high, infections in important
organs can take root. The kidneys and heart are particularly vulnerable.
Back to top
Some Pets are Difficult to Regulate
Your pet will probably require re-regulation at some point. There may be an underlying
reason to sort out. If your pet seems to fit into this category, some reasons could be:
Improper administration of insulin. If possible, have your doctor observe you
giving the insulin to your pet. Another possibility is that your insulin may be out
of date.
Rapid insulin metabolism. Insulin wears off quickly in some animals. Your pet
may require a different type of insulin or a second injection during the day, or
even additional injections during the day.
Insulin overdose may actually lead to elevated glucose levels (and clinical signs
of diabetes mellitus). In this situation, too much insulin brings the blood glucose
too low, and other hormones respond to bring it back up (and generally overdo
it).
Steroid administration (such as prednisone, prednisolone, etc.) will interfere
with insulin.
Progesterone, a female hormone, also interferes with insulin. Unspayed female
diabetics should be spayed once they are sufficiently regulated.
For more details on trouble with regulation, read about hard-to-regulate cats.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 6/9
Additional Information on Feeding a Diabetic Pet
Regulation is achieved via a balance of diet, exercise, and insulin. Realizing that
therapeutic diets are not always attractive to pets, there are some ideal foods that should
at least be offered.
The most up-to-date choice for cats is a low-carbohydrate, high-protein diet. These diets
promote weight loss in obese diabetics and are available in both canned and dry
formulations. For dogs, high-fiber diets are still in favor as fiber seems to help sensitize
the pet to insulin. Talk to your veterinarian to select an appropriate choice for your pet.
Avoid soft-moist diets as sugars are used as preservatives. Avoid bread and sweet treats.
If it is not possible to change the pet's diet, then regulation will just have to be worked out
around whatever the pet will eat.
In Summary:
Diabetes is caused by a deficiency of insulin. Diabetes mostly involves
metabolizing sugar, particularly a sugar called glucose. You will probably
have to give insulin injections to correct the deficiency. It's easier than you
think.
A body requires fuel in the form of fat or sugar. Glucose comes from a diet
of starches and sugars. Tissues cannot absorb glucose without insulin, so
the level of insulin affects the glucose level.
The main symptoms are excessive urination, thirst, appetite, and weight
loss. Watching for these symptoms is the best way to know how your pet is
doing.
Tissues are unable to access any of the glucose they need for fuel and are
basically starving. Rather than going into tissues, unmetabolized glucose
goes into the bloodstream but cannot be removed from there, so glucose
levels become astronomically high. The kidney compensates by dumping
glucose straight into the urine. The kidney needs much water to do that, so
a larger volume of urine is made just for dumping, causing a cycle of
excessive thirst and urination.
Your veterinarian will select the first dose of insulin based on glucose
averages and will tweak it thereafter. You can use either a syringe or an
insulin pen.
While using too little insulin (high blood sugar or hyperglycemia) can lead
to problems, using too much insulin (low blood sugar or hypoglycemia) is
potentially life-threatening in the short term. Low blood sugar creates
listlessness and potential unconsciousness; the fix is to offer food
immediately.
Extremely low blood sugar can cause tremors, seizures, weakness,
collapse, and incoordination, in addition to other signs.
Extremely high blood sugar can cause seizures, circling, pacing,
weakness, coma, and incoordination, among others.
Both are emergency situations, and you should see your
veterinarian or an emergency hospital immediately.
Never alter the insulin dose without discussing it first with your veterinarian.
It's easiest for your pet if you get a glucose meter, install a continuous
monitor, and do blood sampling at home. That way, you can find out their
glucose status right away and do something about it.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 7/9
Some pets are difficult to regulate. Yours will probably require re-regulation
at some point. Regulation needs a consistent balance of diet, exercise, and
insulin.
The current choice of food for diabetic cats is a low-carbohydrate, highprotein diet. High-fiber diets are best for dogs.
Dogs: Diabetes is most likely permanent, and they need insulin shots.
Cats: Diabetes might not be permanent. To have a chance of remission,
they need insulin shots. Some cats might be able to take pills rather than
shots.
Back to top
Related resources
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951506&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158194
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 8/9

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951506&ind=225&objTypeID=1007 9/9
Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Diabetic Dog Diet
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 03, 2024
Published: February 17, 2010
By now, you know that diabetes mellitus is
about a lack of insulin and a need to
balance insulin given by injection with
dietary nutrients, especially sugars, fats,
and proteins. Regardless of the patient's
species, there are some basic principles
that hold true for the dietary management
of diabetes mellitus. First, the obvious: the
pet must like the food and reliably eat it.
For most diabetic dogs, the excessive
appetite typical of the disease ensures
this but after regulation is achieved and
appetite is more normal, it is important
that the dog eats on a dependable
schedule. Insulin is typically given only
after the pet has eaten, so the food
should taste good, and the pet should
want to eat it. Second, the food must be
of quality and quantity to maintain a good
body condition so that the dog is able to
build muscle and a healthy amount of
body fat. Some diabetic dogs are very
thin, while others are too fat. It is
important to tailor the diet to the individual rather than to adhere to rigid dietary rules.
The ultimate goal is to feed the dog two
similar meals a day, approximately 12 hours
apart, with less than 10% of the total
nutrients for the day coming from treats.
Insulin is given within an hour of eating each
meal and this schedule should be
maintained with as much regularity as
possible.
No diet type has emerged as being optimal
for diabetic dogs. The basic idea is to feed
the dog a food that will maintain a healthy
weight.
Most dogs will not need a diet change, but
this may be a good time to re-evaluate your feeding strategy. Here are some
considerations:
Treats

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952921&ind=226&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Basically, minimize them.
The regulation of diabetes mellitus depends on the balance between the carbohydrates
going in and the insulin allowing them to be stored. Many people like to offer the dog a
treat after insulin injections or after blood sampling. This can add a surprising amount of
calories, and it is important to realize that every treat works against the insulin injections
you are giving. If treats are felt to be necessary it will be important to determine how many
calories are being added to the daily intake this way and adjust the meal amount
accordingly. Ideally, treats are small and low in carbohydrates. High-fiber vegetable bits
usually work. Baby carrots should fit the bill. Similar vegetables are also good choices.
Fiber
These large bowel bacteria break down this type of
fiber to feed not only themselves but also to feed
the animal's colon cells, improve bowel circulation,
and generally contribute to bowel health. The
problem is that this process leads to a higher postmeal sugar surge in the bloodstream, which is
exactly what we do not want.
Insoluble fibers, such as cellulose, bulk up the stool,
which can stimulate the colon. Insoluble fiber is not
digested by the colon bacteria and does not offer
calories to the pet that has consumed it. This is helpful for weight loss programs, as the
indigestible fiber contributes to a feeling of fullness without contributing calories.
After a meal, the starches and sugars taken in with the food lead to a postprandial surge
in blood sugar levels. Since the diabetic dog is dealing with runaway blood glucose levels
24 hours a day, meals, as necessary as they are, raise blood sugar even further. Our goal
with dietary therapy is to blunt this effect. Insoluble fiber in the diet helps accomplish this
by slowing the digestion and transit of the food in the gut. Too much insoluble fiber,
however, will give the pet a false sense of being full and reduce appetite, which may not
be what we want if the pet is underweight. So what are we looking for in a food? If the dog
is overweight, we probably want a higher fiber diet (say greater than 15 percent of the dry
matter as fiber) but for a more average dog, we want a moderate amount of fiber (5-15
percent of the dry matter). The fiber content noted in the guaranteed analysis will likely not
specify if the fiber is soluble or insoluble; you will need to check the ingredient list to be
sure.
HOW TO CALCULATE FIBER CONTENT IN FOOD ON A DRY MATTER BASIS
To calculate the percentage of fiber in a diet on a dry matter basis, look for the “crude
fiber” and the “moisture content” amounts on the guaranteed analysis on the food
label.
SAMPLE GUARANTEED ANALYSIS
Crude Protein (min).......8%
Crude Fat (min).........6%
Crude Fiber (max).........1.0%
Moisture (max).........78%
The moisture content is the amount of water in the food on an "as fed" basis
expressed as a percent (what percent of the food you are feeding is actually just
water). Take the moisture content and subtract from 100 to get the dry matter content
of the food (the part of the food that is actually food and not water). For example, if
the moisture content is 78% (typical canned food) then the dry matter is 22%.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952921&ind=226&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Now take the crude fiber value from the guaranteed analysis on the label and divide
by the percent of dry matter. For example, crude fiber on the label is 1%, and
moisture content is 78%. This means dry matter is 22% and 1 divided by 22 = 0.045
or 4.5%. Our hypothetical canned food is 1% fiber as fed but 4.5% on a dry matter
basis. When comparing foods, always compare on a dry matter basis so as to
compare "apples to apples".
The above diet is way too low in fiber for an overweight dog and probably a little light
on fiber for a dog of normal weight or thin dog.
High Digestibility Diets: Probably not the Best Thing
There are numerous diets on the market designed for dogs with sensitive stomachs.
These foods typically are designed for easy digestion and absorption. While this is helpful
to the dog with digestive issues, easy digestion and absorption amounts to higher blood
glucose levels after eating. This is probably not the best thing for a diabetic dog.
Similarly, soft moist foods are preserved and flavored with sugars. These, as you might
guess, raise postprandial blood sugar readily and are poor choices. These diets are not as
common as they once were and should not be confused with canned foods.
Low Fat
A common issue that accompanies diabetes mellitus is elevated triglycerides (fats) in the
bloodstream. In humans, this is the doorway to vascular disease, cholesterol deposits,
heart disease, and stroke. Dogs do not generally have to contend with these issues but
dietary fat becomes more relevant if the dog is one of the 30% for whom pancreatitis is
believed to have damaged the pancreas and led to diabetes in the first place. If
pancreatitis is in play or if the patients circulating triglyceride level is high, then fat
restriction is going to be a must. Further, L-carnitine supplementation may also be of
benefit as this nutrient is helpful in fat transport and metabolism. Fat-restricted diets may
not be a good idea for very thin diabetic dogs, however.
Other Concepts
As long as the diet is consistent, it is generally possible to work with it to achieve diabetic
regulation. Here are some additional tips:
If the dog has an additional medical problem that requires a specific diet in its
management, then this trumps the suggestions for diabetic management.
As long as a reputable food that has passed AAFCO feeding trials is being fed,
it should not be necessary to add nutritional supplements.
Ideally, a brand of food with a fixed formula is preferred to one with an open
formula. Foods with an open formula stick to their prioritized ingredient list on
the label and to the guaranteed analysis minimums and maximums, but the
exact ingredient amounts are not fixed. A fixed formula food uses specific
amounts of each ingredient every time in every lot. In general, non-prescription
diets are open-formula diets.
Your veterinarian can help you choose the most appropriate food for your diabetic dog.
There are several commercial diets made just for this purpose or you may elect to find
one on your own. You can also contact a commercial pet nutrition service for further help.
Ask your veterinarian if you need assistance.
Related resources

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952921&ind=226&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952921&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158219
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952921&ind=226&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 28, 2025
Published: February 09, 2010
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme
complications of diabetes mellitus.
Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis
are in patients that were not previously
known to be diabetic, so the owner (and
pet) must deal with two serious
diagnoses: one acutely life-threatening
and expensive and the other requiring
ongoing commitment and daily treatment.
The diabetic patient has an insulin
deficiency. To recap, there is a huge
amount of glucose in the bloodstream, but
without insulin, none of it can get inside
the cells that need it. It just circulates
around uselessly. The tissues, some of
which require glucose as their only food,
are starving. Add to this some sort of
second stressful condition, such as
infection or pancreatitis, and the tissue
demand for food/fuel increases. The
tissues, including the brain, become
especially desperate, and the body begins
to break down fat frantically in order to liberate the small amount of carbohydrates (which
can convert to glucose) contained therein.
Fat is able to convert to a biochemical called a
ketone body. Ketone bodies can be used as an
alternative fuel source by tissues that require
glucose (brain, red blood cells, etc.). This will save
the day in the short term but the problem is that
ketone bodies do not "burn clean." When ketone
bodies are burned, pH and electrolyte imbalances
ensue. These imbalances create dehydration, which
in turn creates more pH and electrolyte imbalances.
A metabolic disaster results if this state of glucose
desperation persists.
Most patients in diabetic ketoacidosis are lethargic, depressed, and will not eat. They are
dehydrated and frequently nauseated. Blood glucose is extremely high, and ketones can
be detected in the urine. The goal is to gradually correct all the imbalances, get the patient
out of the extreme fat-burning state, and establish some sort of initial regulation of
diabetes.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952917&ind=227&objTypeID=1007 1/3
The prognosis is generally fair as long as the complicating disease (the disease that is
happening on top of diabetes mellitus) can be resolved. That said, round-the-clock
monitoring of electrolytes and blood sugars is needed to safely guide the patient through
the crisis, and this kind of care has a significant expense. Ketoacidosis involves potential
disasters in potassium, phosphorus, pH, blood sugar, and sodium. All of these parameters
must be controlled. The goal is to convert the complicated diabetic patient into an
uncomplicated diabetic patient, but the patient will still be diabetic at the end of treatment.
What to Expect in the Hospital
The sooner the crisis is recognized, the faster treatment can be started. Because
electrolytes can change moment by moment, blood testing is necessary throughout the
day to keep track and keep the imbalances corrected. A facility that offers 24-hour care is
ideal. Aside from the monitoring required to manage the ketoacidosis, testing to determine
the precipitating stress is necessary as well.
In dogs, the most common precipitating/concurrent conditions are pancreatitis, urinary
tract infection, and Cushing's disease. In cats, precipitating/concurrent conditions
include hepatic lipidosis, kidney infection, pancreatitis, and cholangiohepatitis.
Intravenous Fluids
Fluid therapy is the key to treatment. The patient is invariably dehydrated from the high
circulating blood sugar levels, which cause excess fluid loss in urine, as well as from
vomiting or diarrhea, which are common in ketoacidosis. Aside from simply providing
fluids, the IV fluid provides a vehicle by which other metabolic derangements can be
repaired.
Insulin
Blood sugar must be controlled if treatment is to be successful but to prevent brain
damage, blood sugar levels must be dropped slowly. To achieve this, “regular insulin”
(typically Humulin R®) is used, given either as multiple intramuscular injections or as a
continuous drip. This type of insulin is short-acting and wears off quickly, which allows it to
provide small adjustments. It is not until the patient is eating and nausea has been
controlled that maintenance insulins can be started.
Potassium
Patients in ketoacidosis are greatly depleted in potassium. While insulin is needed to
control blood sugar, insulin worsens the problem by driving potassium into the body’s cells
and out of the bloodstream. Typically, high amounts of potassium must be supplemented
in the intravenous fluid solution.
Phosphorus
Low levels of phosphorus also accompany diabetic ketoacidosis. If levels drop too low, the
patient’s red blood cells will begin to burst and be unable to maintain integrity. Phosphorus
is also supplemented through the intravenous fluid solution.
Blood pH
The term ketoacidosis implies that the blood pH is overly acidic. If the situation is severe
enough, sodium bicarbonate must be added to the intravenous therapy.
All these aspects require regular monitoring, which means lab work perhaps four times
daily or more. Patients in diabetic ketoacidosis require close monitoring and intensive
care.
When urine dipsticks no longer test positive for ketones and the patient is eating well and
in good spirits, he or she is able to go home and be managed as a regular diabetic. Diet,
monitoring, insulin etc. will be on-going concerns. Ideally, Ketostix, obtainable from any

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952917&ind=227&objTypeID=1007 2/3
drug store, will be used at home to monitor for ketones to head off problems before they
become extreme in the future.
It could take as long as a week to induce enough regulation to control the ketone situation
and get the patient back to an uncomplicated diabetic state. Intensive care is needed.
Assuming the secondary condition can be stabilized and the ketoacidosis state is
reversed, the patient must contend with diabetic regulation just like any other newly
diagnosed diabetic patient. With good vigilance and prompt medical attention, poor
regulation/undiagnosed diabetes can be recognized before complications such as this
arise.
Related resources
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Glipizide (Glucotrol) - April 9, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952917&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158240
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:40 PM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952917&ind=227&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 11, 2024
Published: February 22, 2004
What the Pancreas Normally Does
The pancreas is a small, light pink glandular organ nestled under the stomach and
alongside the upper small intestine. There are two types of pancreatic tissues to know
about. The first tissue is the "endocrine" pancreas, which is the part of the pancreas that
secretes hormones involved in blood sugar regulation, such as insulin (which you have
probably heard about if you know anyone with diabetes). The "exocrine" pancreas
produces enzymes we use to digest our food. These two parts of the pancreas are not in
separate areas but instead these two different types of pancreatic tissues are all mixed
together throughout the entire pancreas.
Digestive enzymes break down fats, starches, and proteins into smaller units so that we
can absorb them into our bodies. These enzymes are stored as inactive forms inside
special granules in the exocrine pancreatic tissue. The enzymes sit there harmlessly until
a chemical signal tells the pancreas to secrete them down the pancreatic duct and into the
intestine, where the food is waiting.
Once nutrients are broken down into smaller molecules (i.e. they are digested), they can
be absorbed down the entire length of the GI tract. Without an adequate amount of
enzymes, we cannot break down/digest our food. If we cannot digest the food, we cannot
absorb the food. We get skinny, have especially nasty, rather greasy diarrhea, or both.
Often, a pet with maldigestion will develop a dry, dandruffy coat from inability to absorb
dietary fats and can have a serious red blood cell reduction from a vitamin B12
deficiency.
Difficulty in clotting blood (vitamin K-related coagulopathy) can result as well.
Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency (also called Maldigestion)
The most common cause of digestive enzyme deficiency in dogs is “pancreatic acinar
atrophy,” where the pancreas simply becomes shriveled and useless. This condition
seems to have a genetic basis but is not congenital and may develop at any age (though
usually shows up before age 4 years).
The German Shepherd Dog and Rough-Coated Collie are particularly at risk and the
mode of inheritance appears to be autosomal recessive (meaning genetic carriers will
appear normal). About 70% of dogs with exocrine pancreatic insufficiency are German
Shepherd dogs and 20% are Rough Collies.
Recently a juvenile onset form of exocrine pancreatic insufficiency has been described in
the Greyhound, however, because this breed is primarily used in racing, sickly puppies
are commonly euthanized thus keeping the condition from being recognized in the pet
population.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952034&ind=228&objTypeID=1007 1/4
On the left is the normal stomach. pancreas, and intestine in a dog or cat belly. On the right is the
same organs in a dog or cat who has exocrine pancreatic insufficiency. Notice the atrophied
pancreas.
Photo courtesy of CDC
In cats,
chronic
pancreatitis is
the usual
cause of
exocrine
pancreatic
insufficiency.
There does
not appear to
be a genetic
concern;
though, rarely,
cats that eat
grasshoppers
may get
infected with a
pancreatic
fluke carried
by
grasshoppers
(Eurytrema
procyonis).
This fluke,
similar to a very small worm, can cause enough inflammation to cause pancreatitis or
enough general pancreatic damage to cause exocrine insufficiency. Fluke infection is rare,
as mentioned, but feline pancreatitis is actually very common, especially in older cats.
There is frequently a link to chronic intestinal disease.
Diagnosis Requires Specific Tests
Trypsin-Like Immunoreactivity
The biggest breakthrough in diagnosing exocrine
pancreatic insufficiency was developing the serum
trypsin-like immunoreactivity test, a blood test.
Before this, an assortment of inaccurate fecal tests
were used. Trypsin is one of the digestive
enzymes secreted by the exocrine pancreas. The
TLI test looks for a normal level of trypsin-like
enzymes in the bloodstream. This is harmless,
normal, and measurable in a blood test.
A dog or cat with EPI will have almost no serum
trypsin-like immunoreactivity in the bloodstream.
The patient must be fasted for the test to be accurate, but only a single blood sample is
needed to make the diagnosis. The feline version of this test often requires that the
sample be sent to a university laboratory and generally a week or so is needed to get
results but the canine test can be run in just a few days.
Other Tests
Another popular diagnostic is the fecal protease test, where a stool sample is tested for
protein-digesting enzymes. Fasting is not necessary and any fecal sample will do;
however, three consecutive samples are needed to get a consistent result as there is
tremendous variability in fecal enzyme activity over the day. Sometimes soybeans are
given to dogs to help stimulate the release of pancreatic protein digestion enzymes and
get a more accurate test.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952034&ind=228&objTypeID=1007 2/4
The fecal elastase test (elastase is another digestive enzyme) is the newest and it is only
available for dogs. A single fecal sample is needed but the problem is that sometimes
normal dogs will test negative for elastase. This means that EPI can be ruled out when the
elastase test is positive but not confirmed when the elastase test is negative.
Treatment
Dietary supplementation with digestive enzymes is an effective therapy for EPI even
though most of the supplement given is digested in the stomach along with other dietary
proteins. The little bit that survives the acid bath of the stomach and the patient’s own
protein-digesting chemicals turns out to be enough to stop the diarrhea and enable the
patient actually to gain some weight. Powdered enzymes (Viokase-V, Pancrezyme,
PanaKare, and other brands) seem to work the best; tablets are available but do not seem
to break down consistently. If the pet finds the taste of the enzymes objectionable, a
compounding pharmacy can fill gel capsules with the powder. Again, enteric-coated
tablets simply do not seem to work well.
In the past, it was suggested that incubating the enzymes in the patient’s food would help
initiate the digestion process in the food bowl but this is not true; the enzymes can be fed
immediately mixed with the patient’s regular pet food. Some patients respond best when
an H2 blocker-type antacid (such as famotidine) is given concurrently with the enzymes.
It is important to thoroughly mix the enzyme powder into the food, because if it is sprinkled
on top, it can be abrasive and lead to ulceration in the pet’s mouth. If ulceration has
already occurred in this situation, incubating the food with the enzymes can help resolve
the problem. A six-hour incubation at room temperature should suffice. If the food is to be
refrigerated, a 24-incubation has been recommended.
Raw beef or lamb pancreas can also be used as a possibly inexpensive form of enzyme
replacement but the problems with raw foods include parasite and bacterial
contamination. Cooking the pancreas relieves these concerns but inactivates the desired
digestive enzymes. Raw pancreas can be stored frozen without losing digestive enzyme
activity.
Generally, a high-digestibility diet is the best choice for an EPI patient. These foods are
low in fiber and may be especially helpful for patients with trouble gaining weight. Many
animals simply use enzymes mixed with their regular food if prescription diets prove too
expensive.
EPI patients commonly have an overgrowth of bacteria in their intestines, which means
that the unabsorbed nutrients in the tract have fed the bacteria living there, instead of the
patient, and an over-population of bacteria has occurred. This results in a vitamin B-12
(also called cobalamin) deficiency as the bacteria consume the vitamin instead of the
patient getting his share. Periodic injections of vitamin B-12 and blood test monitoring
have been recommended for patients with EPI. The B-12/cobalamin deficiency is a
particularly big problem for cats with EPI, who typically require injections every couple of
weeks for life. Recently, an oral B-12 product has become available for dogs and cats.
Folate deficiency is also common in cats, and supplements are required for the first month
of therapy. Checking cobalamin and folate blood levels regularly is especially important for
cats with EPI. Supplementation with fat-soluble vitamins (especially vitamin K and vitamin
E) is not usually needed.
Treatment is for life and without enzyme supplementation, all the unpleasant symptoms
will recur. The good news is that a response to therapy is generally seen within a week of
beginning it. The response can be excellent but approximately one dog in five will simply
not respond well. Many do not ever regain a normal amount of weight.
What if Results Are Not as Rapid as Expected?

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952034&ind=228&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Most pets respond in a matter of days to enzyme supplementation but if a week or so
goes by and the results are underwhelming, here are some tips to consider:
Use more enzyme powder with each meal.
Check the powder's expiration date. Consider a different brand of powder.
Be sure to supplement vitamin B12 by injection. Many pets will not get better
until this deficiency is corrected.
Consider incubating the enzymes in the food. This is not supposed to matter,
but some pet owners feel that it does.
Consider a prescription diet if one is not already in use.
If all of these factors are already controlled and diarrhea still has not cleared up, it may be
time to consider that a second disease is afoot. Discuss this possibility with your
veterinarian.
Want more support online? Join an Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency Forum for dog
owners.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952034&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158260
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Exocrine Pancreatic Insufficiency in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952034&ind=228&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and
Dogs
Margaret Hammond-Lenzer, DVM; Sherri Wilson, DVM, DACVIM; Brett Wasik, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: October 04, 2022
Published: May 22, 2019
The flash glucose monitoring system (also called continuous glucose monitoring or CGM)
is a faster, easier, and less painful way for you to monitor your diabetic pet’s glucose
levels at home. There are several flash glucose monitoring systems on the market, of
which FreeStyle Libre is one. The following information is only referencing the FreeStyle
Libre, as that is the only system with which veterinarians have experience to date, and the
only system with a published study in dogs. Unfortunately, however, the company (Abbott)
does not provide support for veterinary use (e.g. it is not approved in animals, and they do
not answer questions about animal use on their support line nor do they replace the
Sensor should it prematurely detach from an animal or fail to work on an animal).
A flash monitoring system allows you to monitor your pet’s glucose levels at home without
pricking foot pads, ears, or lips to collect blood which means that more frequent readings
can be taken without additional stress for you or your pet.
Flash glucose monitoring systems measure the glucose in the fluid that is present in the
tissues under the skin (interstitial fluid glucose). There is a small difference in this
measurement as compared to the amount of glucose in the blood, but for the purpose of
monitoring your pet’s diabetes that difference is negligible.
How it Works
A sensor with a tiny, flexible sampling catheter (tube) is implanted in your pet’s skin. The
sampling catheter is linked to a glucose analyzer that has a wireless link to a reader
similar to a grocery store bar code reader. The reader can sense the glucose level when it
is within a few feet of the sensor, but active readings (passing the reader over the sensor)
should be taken at intervals recommended by your veterinarian. The sensor should be
actively scanned at least every 8 hours to maximize the data capture within that 24-hour
period. Instead of the Reader, an iPhone app can be used as the reader if the owner has
an iPhone 7 (or newer). Only one iPhone should be used as the Reader, as there will be
big gaps in the data if two iPhones in the house are used.
The sensor is about the size of a quarter and about as thick as two stacked quarters.
Sensor with Sampling Catheter

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=9150771&ind=229&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Photo by Dr. Margaret Hammond-Lenzer
How the Sensor is Implanted
Implanting the sensor should be done by your veterinarian. Implanting the sensor takes
only seconds and is less painful than a vaccination. Most pets don’t even notice when the
sensor is implanted.
A small area on your pet’s back is shaved, the area is cleaned, and the sensor, which
comes with its own implantation device, is pressed into the skin.
Ready for Implantation

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=9150771&ind=229&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Photo by Dr. Margaret Hammond-Lenzer
Sensor Implanted
Photo by Dr. Margaret Hammond-Lenzer
Where do I Get One?
Your veterinarian will write a prescription for the sensor. Each sensor is only used once
and will generate 14 days of continuous glucose data. You will need to purchase a new
sensor any time your veterinarian recommends repeating the glucose monitoring.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=9150771&ind=229&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Since animals have their own ideas, many pets manage to dislodge the sensor before the
14-day expiration. Don’t despair, on average your veterinarian can get several days of
data which can still provide accurate information to manage your dog or cat’s blood
glucose concentrations appropriately. Even a day or two of data is no more expensive than
a single daylong curve in a vet hospital and the sensor data shows the glucose levels when
the pet is not stressed, which is invaluable, especially in cats. 
The reader should last for 3 years if you take care of it. A charging cord is supplied in the
reader kit.
How Can I Increase the Odds of Keeping the Sensor On?
Your veterinarian will attempt to find the best area for your pet's sensor placement. A flat
area that doesn't move much, isn't within one inch of where the insulin is injected, and that
the pet's mouth and back feet can't reach is needed. The ideal area may be different for
each pet, especially cats. Some cats leave it more alone if they are wearing a ‘T-shirt’,
such as a piece of orthopedic stockinette that has holes cut in it for their legs. You could
put an Elizabethan collar on the pet so they can’t turn around and bite it out, then just
concentrate on putting it in a place where their back legs don’t easily reach to scratch it
off.
How do I Interpret the Information?
Your veterinarian will work with you to make sure you can upload the data from the reader
to your computer and send it to the veterinary hospital for review. Because the sensor
lasts 14 days, your veterinarian can usually change the insulin dose 1-2 times (if
necessary) while the sensor is still working and evaluate the results of that change.
This means you and your veterinarian need to figure out how data will be sent to them
BEFORE the Sensor is activated, so you can take full advantage of the data.
Important Information about Hypoglycemia
The flash systems are sometimes not as consistently reliable for pets as they are for
humans.
If the flash system indicates that your pet’s glucose level is low and your pet isn’t having
signs of low blood glucose (trembling, weakness, panting, seizures, collapse etc.) you
should check your pet’s blood glucose with a standard veterinary glucometer before
offering any snacks to counteract the hypoglycemia.
If your pet is having signs of hypoglycemia and the flash system is registering a normal
glucose level you should also double check the flash system against a standard
glucometer.
Flash glucose monitoring systems are a big step forward in managing diabetes in our
pets. With these systems your veterinarian has vital information that can help them craft a
treatment protocol that exactly fits your pet’s metabolic needs.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9150771&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158282
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=9150771&ind=229&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Flash Glucose Monitoring with FreeStyle Libre in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=9150771&ind=229&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Image Courtesy of MarVistaVet
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 26, 2023
Published: February 09, 2010
The goal in long-term management of
diabetes mellitus is the alleviation of
unpleasant clinical signs (constant thirst,
weight loss, etc.) and the prevention of
dangerous secondary conditions
(infections, ketoacidosis, etc.). To
accomplish this, blood sugar levels should
be regulated between 250 mg/dl (13.88
mmol/L) and 80 mg/dl (4.44 mmol/L). This
is not as good as the body’s natural
regulation, but it is a fair and achievable
goal in most cases.
Some patients just seem completely
unaffected by even high doses of insulin,
and it is important to have a step-by-step
plan to rule out causes of insulin
resistance so that regulation can be
achieved.
Insulin resistance is defined as:
Persistent high blood sugar levels
throughout the day when three units
of insulin per four pounds of patient body weight are used.
or
A unit or more of insulin per pound of patient body weight
(or more) is needed to achieve regulation.
Typically, glucose curves show levels that are consistently too
high with virtually no drop in sugar level when insulin activity is
peaking. So what is going on here? The possibilities may seem
surprising.
Step One: Rule out Owner-Related Factors
Owner error is actually the most common cause of what is
thought to be insulin resistance.
This may seem basic, but it is important not to skip the basics.
Confirm that the amount of insulin being drawn into the insulin
syringe is correct, that the injection technique is correct, and

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952918&ind=230&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Image Courtesy of MarVistaVet
that the patient is actually receiving the injection. Rule out any snacking or changes in the
patient’s feeding schedule. Be sure the bottle of insulin is not expired and that it has been
properly stored. Ideally, the veterinary staff will observe insulin administration and will
check the bottle while the pet is being checked in the hospital.
Review insulin storage and handling.
Step Two: Determine for sure that the
Patient is Insulin Resistant
A glucose curve is needed to
distinguish the following three
phenomena.
Somogyi Overswing
In the case of Somogyi overswing, the
insulin dose is too high and drives the
blood sugar low for part of the day.
When the blood sugar is low, other
hormones such as cortisone or
adrenalin are released to raise blood
sugar. These hormones can have a
prolonged effect (many hours), thus
creating hyperglycemia (high blood
sugar). If the patient’s high blood sugar
has been caused by a Somogyi overswing, a lower dose should be used and a new curve
performed in a week or two. One might think a flat glucose curve (i.e. one not showing
hypoglycemia followed by hyperglycemia) would rule out Somogyi overswing but, in fact, a
Somogyi hyperglycemia can persist for days and create a flat curve. Often a good
approach is to cut the insulin dose back and see what the curve looks like.
Rapid Insulin Metabolism
In this case, the insulin simply is not lasting long enough to create sustained normal blood
sugar levels. If the curve shows that the insulin effect is wearing off too soon, twice a day
administration of the insulin may solve this problem or a longer-acting insulin may be
needed. Longer acting insulins tend to have poorer absorption into the body from an
injection site. This may also necessitate change to a different insulin type. Often it is
necessary to change to a human insulin from a canine insulin.
True Insulin Resistance
Here no significant drop in blood sugar level (levels stay greater than 300 mg/dl[16.65
mmol/L]) is seen in response to the insulin dose used. Usually there is a history of prior
increases in insulin dose, all met with minimal response.
Step Three: Spay
Hormone fluctuations will easily account for insulin resistance as progesterone is one of
many hormones that raise blood sugar levels (by stimulating growth hormone secretion).
Canine unspayed female diabetics need to be spayed if regulation is to be achieved.
(Feline patients do not have a similar relationship with naturally occurring progesterones
and do not require spaying; however, progesterone-type medications can produce
diabetes in cats. Diabetic patients of either species should not take progesterone-related
medications.)
Step Four: Rule out Infection
Diabetic animals are at risk for developing bladder infections because they have so much
sugar in their urine. Stress of any kind will contribute to high blood sugar and infection
would lead to stress. A urine culture should be done to rule out bladder infection, plus the

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952918&ind=230&objTypeID=1007 2/5
teeth and skin should be inspected for infection in these areas. If infection per se is not
found, the patient should be screened for other chronic illnesses that might constitute a
stress. A basic blood panel would be a logical starting point.
If infection or other stress is allowed to go unchecked, ketoacidosis, an especially lifethreatening complication of diabetes mellitus, can develop.
To avoid infection issues, it is a good idea to plan for diabetic patients to have
their teeth cleaned annually and to have the urine periodically cultured whether
there are symptoms of a problem or not.
Step Five: Control Obesity
Insulin response is typically blunted in obese patients. If obesity is an issue, it
should be addressed. A formal weight loss program using measured amounts of
a prescription diet and regular weigh-ins is necessary for success. See general
information about weight loss for pets. If these steps do not reveal a relatively
simple explanation for the poor insulin response, then it is time to seek more
complicated causes. This generally means an additional hormone imbalance.
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s Disease)
This condition is relatively common in dogs but less so in cats. This condition involves an
excess in cortisone-type hormones, either from over-production within the body or overtreatment with medication. Cortisone - more accurately referred to as cortisol - is secreted
naturally in response to a fight or flight situation and prepares the body for exercise by
mobilizing sugar stores. If sugar is mobilized into the blood stream in the absence of a
fight or flight situation, diabetes mellitus can result. If the excess cortisone situation is
resolved, it is possible that the diabetes will also resolve.
About 10% of dogs with Cushing’s disease are also diabetic. About 80% of cats with
Cushing’s disease are also diabetic. Testing for Cushing’s disease cannot proceed until
some degree of diabetic control has been achieved and the patient is not ketoacidotic.
Excess Circulating Lipids
High levels of circulating triglycerides (fats) interfere with binding insulin to the cells it
needs to act upon. While most dogs with excess circulating lipids are not diabetic, when a
diabetic patient is insulin resistant it may be helpful to attempt to reduce the circulating
fats. Excess lipids in the blood usually occur because of some other hormone imbalance
(Cushing’s disease, hypothyroidism in dogs etc.) but they can simply happen
spontaneously in the miniature schnauzer.
Circulating fats are reduced by treating the hormone imbalance that caused them if there
is one. If there is no underlying disease, circulating lipids can be reduced with diet and
omega 3 fatty acid supplementation.
Acromegaly
Acromegaly results from an over-secretion of the pituitary hormone known as growth
hormone. This hormone normally is responsible for one’s growth from infancy to
adulthood. When adulthood is achieved, its secretion dramatically slows, bone growth
plates close, and growth essentially stops. If for some reason, this hormone begins
secreting again, growth resumes but not generally in normal proportions as the limb bones
have closed their growth areas.
One of the effects of growth hormone is causing the body tissues to become resistant to
insulin by interfering with tissue insulin receptors. Animals with acromegaly are frequently
diabetic.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952918&ind=230&objTypeID=1007 3/5
The prognosis and treatment for acromegaly is different between dogs and cats. Dogs
generally develop acromegaly due to excess progesterone secretion, as would occur from
an ovarian cyst. Canine patients are thus usually older, unspayed females and spaying
may be curative depending on the remaining ability of the pancreas to secrete insulin.
Antibodies against Insulin
When a patient is treated with insulin from another species, the immune system
recognizes the introduction of the foreign protein and generates antibodies. It was
because of this phenomenon that most commercial insulin available is genetically
engineered human insulin so that the world’s human diabetics no longer need to worry
about making insulin antibodies.
But where does this leave dogs and cats? It leaves them making antibodies against
human insulin, that’s where. There is no feline insulin product available; the closest thing
is beef insulin. Dogs are luckier as their insulin is identical to pig insulin and porcine insulin
is available as Vetsulin® (Caninsulin® in Canada). If a human insulin is used, some
degree of antibody production is a forgone conclusion.
You would think this would pose a big problem but in fact insulin antibodies are not always
bad. Most of the time the antibodies simply interfere with removal of the insulin, leading to
a longer-acting insulin than would be achieved with the same type of insulin made from
the native species. For example, Humulin N® (human insulin) will last longer in the dog
than Canine Insulin N (if there were such a product). This may be desirable depending on
the patient; changing the species of origin of the insulin is one way to get the insulin to last
a bit longer.
To become insulin resistant from antibodies, a body must lose 70% or more of the insulin
injection to antibody binding. This is very unusual but possible and should not be forgotten
as a possible cause of insulin resistance. Blood tests to measure insulin antibodies are
available in some areas. Insulin can be switched to a species of origin more closely
related to the species desired.
If a Cause Cannot be Found
If a cause cannot be found or if treatment for that cause is not practical or possible, the
good news is that multiple high doses of insulin can generally overcome the resistance.
Sometimes combinations of short and long-acting insulins are used together to achieve
reasonable regulation.
Related resources
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952918&ind=230&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952918&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158310
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:41 PM Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952918&ind=230&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 30, 2024
Published: September 14, 2004
What Does High Blood Calcium Mean?
Calcium is a mineral we have all heard about as
many of us have been told to drink our milk for
adequate calcium since we were children. Women
are encouraged to supplement calcium, not just in
pregnancy but virtually throughout adulthood, in
hopes of preventing osteoporosis. Calcium is not
only important as a component of bone; it is also
involved in the contraction of all muscle tissue from
the skeletal muscles that move our limbs voluntarily,
to the involuntary muscles that move our intestinal
contents, and our heart muscle that beats regularly
and tirelessly throughout life.
There’s more.
Calcium is used as a messenger to activate enzymes and regulate all sorts of body
functions. Calcium is such a crucial component of our biochemistry that virtually any
complete blood panel, whether human or veterinary, will include a measurement of
calcium. Our bodies go to tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within
a very narrow range. A storage source to draw upon is needed for more circulating
calcium as well as a system to unload excess.
How Calcium is Used in Our Bodies
Calcium exists in several states in our bodies depending on whether it is being used or
stored. Ionized calcium is circulating free in the bloodstream and is active or ready to be
used in one of the numerous body functions requiring calcium. The amount of ionized
calcium in the blood is tightly regulated. Too much is dangerous. Too little is dangerous.
About 50% of blood calcium is present as ionized calcium.
Bound calcium is also circulating in the bloodstream but it is not floating around freely.
Instead, it is carried by molecules of albumin (a blood protein whose job is to transport
substances that don’t freely dissolve in blood) or with other ions. About 40% of blood
calcium is bound (i.e. carried by albumin or complexed with another ion). Ionized calcium
and bound calcium added together are called total calcium. This value is reported on most
blood chemistry panels. Total calcium refers to the total calcium in the bloodstream, not
the total calcium in the body.
Calcium is also stored in the minerals of bone. We do not usually think of bone as more
than just scaffolding, but living bone is a surprisingly active tissue. One of its functions is
to store calcium and when calcium is needed, it can be mobilized from the bone. Normally,
there is plenty of calcium, and such mobilization does not significantly weaken the bone
structure, but if excess calcium is mobilized, bone can be depleted and softened.

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Adjusting Calcium Levels
When the body needs to raise blood-ionized calcium levels, the sources it may draw from
are the bones (where calcium is stored as a mineral), the intestine (where the calcium we
eat enters our bodies), and the kidney (where excess calcium is dumped into
the urine). We can regulate how much dietary calcium is allowed to enter from the GI
tract. Our bodies can take calcium from bones quickly or slowly as our needs dictate.
When our bodies need to drop the ionized calcium level, our kidneys can remove
circulating calcium, including it in our urine so that it can be happily flushed away.
These processes are controlled by two hormones: parathyroid hormone (affectionately
called PTH) and calcitriol (affectionately known as vitamin D).
Calcitriol acts to enhance calcium absorption into the body from the intestine, promote the
release of calcium from bone, and cause the kidney to avoid dumping calcium. This adds
up to higher blood-ionized calcium. PTH also acts to mobilize bone calcium and shut off
renal calcium dumping. This also adds up to more blood-ionized calcium.
Calcitriol shuts off PTH production in the parathyroid glands, keeping calcium from rising
higher and higher. PTH is necessary for the activation of vitamin D/calcitriol. Essentially,
these two hormones work to counterbalance each other and keep calcium levels in a good
range.
The sequence of events might be this: blood-ionized calcium begins to drop. The
parathyroid glands sense this and release PTH, causing ionized calcium to rise. When
PTH levels are high enough, vitamin D/calcitriol is activated. With active vitamin
D/calcitriol on the scene, ionized calcium begins to rise even more. When enough vitamin
D/calcitriol has been activated, the parathyroid glands shut off PTH production, and
PTH/calcitriol blood levels begin to drop. When PTH levels are low enough, vitamin
D/calcitriol activation ceases. With both PTH and active vitamin D/calcitriol levels low,
calcium levels begin to drop until they drop low enough to activate the whole system over
again.
Why High Calcium Levels Are Bad
Elevated blood calcium starts when the bones receive an inappropriate message to
mobilize their calcium. This message is either from excess parathyroid hormone (as might
be produced by a parathyroid gland tumor) or from high amounts of parathyroid hormonerelated protein (see later). When calcium is removed from the bones, all that is left is a
fibrous scaffold that is not really strong enough to support us. Our bones break and even
fold.
Our kidneys normally would perceive these high calcium levels and attempt to unload as
much calcium as possible into the urine. If parathyroid hormone levels are high, the
kidneys are completely prevented from doing so. Without the ability to unload calcium, the
kidney’s system for water and sodium conservation is impaired. The result is excessive
urine production (and often excessive thirst to match). In time, the excess calcium levels
going through the kidney are damaging and kidney failure results. Calcium begins to
deposit in all the body’s soft tissues actually mineralizing them. This is a painful and
inflammatory process.
So, how can this system that seems so perfect get out of balance and allow blood calcium
levels to rise dramatically? One common issue is excess parathyroid hormone-related
protein.
What is Parathyroid Hormone-Related Protein?
This substance, abbreviated PTH-rP, is produced by numerous body tissues and has
actions similar to those of Parathyroid Hormone. It is a normal substance in the body;
however, some tumors produce it in very high amounts. When it is present in such very

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 2/7
high amounts, blood calcium becomes dangerously high. Detecting PTH-rP is a sign that
a cancer is afoot somewhere in the body.
What Causes Hypercalcemia?
Given the feedback system described, the list is rather short:
A tumor excessively producing PTH-rP. Such tumors include lymphoma, anal
sac carcinoma, mammary tumors, and multiple myeloma. It is possible for other
tumors to secrete PTH-rP in high amounts but it is rare. The common tumors
should be sought first. Lymphoma (lymphatic cancer) is probably by far the
most common cause of elevated calcium in dogs.
Parathyroid gland tumor secreting PTH.
Kidney failure (altering the calcium and phosphorus balance). It should be
noted that kidney failure causes hypercalcemia, and hypercalcemia causes
kidney failure. It will be difficult to determine which came first, but since kidney
failure tends to progress rapidly when there is hypercalcemia, this puts more of
a rush on the testing sequence.
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism - a deficiency in adrenal steroid
hormones).
Vitamin D Poisoning (some newer rat poisons use vitamin D analogs – the
good news is that you would usually know if rat poison was in the pet’s
environment or if the pet had gotten into such a product).
Quintox and Rampage are two brands of rat poison using Vitamin D analogs.
Others include Rat-B-Gone and Mouse-B-Gone.
Fungal disease (certain fungal infections cause tissues to calcify, especially
lung tissue, and be associated with elevated blood calcium levels).
Idiopathic hypercalcemia (rare in dogs, common in cats) means that after a
complete work-up of tests, no cause can be found. Frustratingly, this is the
most common cause of hypercalcemia in cats, though it is an extremely rare
situation for dogs. Most cats in this situation show no clinical signs of elevated
calcium (versus dogs who almost always have marked thirst), though 15% of
cats will have bladder stones (usually calcium oxalate stones).
What Tests Come Next?
Back to the patient with an elevated calcium level that needs to be tracked down. Often,
elevated calcium is found as an unpleasant surprise on a screening test for a patient that,
at first glance, seems normal.
Your veterinarian might recommend the following tests. However, depending on your pet's
individual health issues, your veterinarian may not recommend testing in this exact order. 
STEP ONE: Make sure to check ionized calcium.
Total calcium is what is usually reported on a blood panel, but it is ionized calcium (the
actual active portion of calcium) that we care about. If total calcium is elevated but ionized
calcium is normal then we are done testing. Sometimes, excessive fat circulating in the

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 3/7
blood will increase total calcium. An elevation in blood pH can also raise total calcium, and
it is possible for a dehydrated patient to have a high total calcium. If ionized calcium is not
elevated, our patient does not have a hypercalcemia problem.
STEP TWO: Double-check the patient for obvious diseases that might elevate calcium.
This is particularly important if the elevated total calcium was a surprise finding and the
patient is no longer in the hospital. The patient will be back in the hospital for an ionized
calcium level, as above; this is the perfect opportunity to feel the throat carefully for
possible parathyroid growth, do a rectal exam to rule out an anal gland tumor, and check
all the lymph nodes for enlargement. Mammary glands should be carefully checked for
growths. Obviously, if any of these are found, we have a direction to pursue, and further
testing may not be needed, but if nothing is found, the biochemical tests listed below will
be needed.
This is also a good time to review the basic lab work where the elevated total calcium was
discovered. Renal insufficiency/kidney failure is the third most common cause of
hypercalcemia. Basic blood work should readily pick this up. A significantly elevated
globulin level, a red flag for multiple myeloma, also should be evident on basic lab work if
the pet has it. Multiple myeloma is a type of blood cancer that produces
excessive antibodies. Serum electrophoresis (another blood test) will help rule this in or
out if globulin levels are consistent.
STEP THREE: ACTH Stimulation Test for Addison's Disease (or at least a Baseline Cortisol
Level)
In one study of 40 dogs with elevated calcium, 29% had Addison’s disease, making this
condition a common cause of hypercalcemia (though not as common as lymphoma and
parathyroid tumors). Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism) is a deficiency in adrenal
steroid hormones.
It has been referred to as "The Great Imitator" because it can present in so many unusual
ways and look like numerous other conditions. There are two ways to approach testing: a
screening test and then a confirming test if the screening test is positive, OR jumping
directly to the confirming test. The screening test involves a single cortisol level. If this
level is greater than 2.5 mg/dl (0.069 mmol/L) then Addison's disease is ruled out and we
can continue to STEP FOUR. If the level is less than 2.5 mg/dl (0.069 mmol/L), then an
ACTH stimulation test is needed and the dog will need an hour or two in the hospital. The
stimulation test assesses the dog's ability to respond to adrenal stimulation and results
should definitively rule Addison's disease in or out.
STEP FOUR: Run a PTH level and PTH-rP Level
At this point, we are looking for a tumor. The PTH level will tell us if there is a parathyroid
tumor. There may or may not be a palpable mass in the throat where the parathyroid
glands are. You may recall that parathyroid hormone acts to raise blood calcium levels.
When blood calcium levels are high, parathyroid hormone production shuts down. If the
PTH level is even in the upper 2/3 of the normal range in the face of high blood calcium
levels, this is inappropriate and indicates a parathyroid tumor. Surgical exploration of the
throat/neck area are indicated at this point.
If a PTH-rP level is high, this is a strong indicator of cancer and we just need to find out
where. Usually, lymphoma would be the culprit, but, as mentioned, many other tumors are
on the list of possibilities.

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 4/7
PTH level ionized
calcium PTH-rP
Parathyroid Tumor
very high to
normal
A PTH level in
the upper 50%
of the "normal
range" is not
normal if blood
calcium is high
very high very low
Lymphoma very low very high very high
Anal Sac Tumor very low very high very high
Kidney Failure very high
to normal
very low
to normal
very high
to normal
Idiopathic
Hypercalcemia normal to low high very low
The constellation of these tests will tell us if we must search for a parathyroid tumor,
search for another type of tumor, treat Addison’s disease, or attempt to manage kidney
disease.
STEP FIVE: The Tumor Search
At this point, we have done all the blood testing we can do and ruled out Addison’s
disease, parathyroid tumor, and primary kidney disease. If we have an elevated PTH-rp
level, we have a high confidence level that cancer is afoot somewhere, even if we have
not found it. Even if we do not have an elevated PTH-rp level, there is a good chance
cancer is afoot somewhere. In either case, the tumor needs to be found.
We are looking for a tumor that is not readily apparent and lymphoma is the most
common. Again, we would like to reserve the most expensive and the most invasive
testing for last in case they are not necessary. With this in mind, the following would be a
reasonable sequence:
Chest and Abdominal Radiographs to look for latent organ enlargement that
might lead to the hidden tumor.
A bone marrow tap (requires general anesthesia).
Ultrasound of the belly to further look for hidden tumors and evaluate the
kidneys.
Some screening radiographs to look at bone quality.
Multiple myeloma is a kind of cancer associated with hypercalcemia. Many of its features
might be detected in the course of this workup, but it is helpful to remember that there are
criteria to meet before making a diagnosis of multiple myeloma, and some additional tests
might be needed. This special type of cancer is diagnosed based on finding two of the
following signs:

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Monoclonal gammopathy in the blood (multiple myeloma is a tumor that
produces antibodies. If electrophoresis of the blood proteins shows a large
elevation of a single type of antibody, this is called a monoclonal gammopathy.)
A moth-eaten appearance to bones on radiographs (especially the vertebral
bones).
Abnormal proteins in the urine (called Bence-Jones proteins).
Greater than 5% cancer cells on a bone marrow tap or greater than 10-20%
plasma cells, which produce antibodies, on a bone marrow tap.
Canine total calcium levels greater than 18 mg/dl are a medical emergency.
Levels greater than 15 mg/dl definitely require immediate treatment. Milder
elevations are not as urgent and allow more time for diagnostics before initiating
treatment.
Treatment
Dietary Therapy
Reducing the amount of calcium entering the body can help restore blood calcium levels
to normal, and there are several approaches. If a primary cause of hypercalcemia is
found, a diet appropriate for that disease is best. Lightly salting food may be helpful as salt
encourages the kidneys to dump calcium, though this method remains untested for the
treatment of hypercalcemia. Supplementing the diet with fiber has been helpful in some
studies but not in others. While the jury is still out on fiber supplementation, adding fiber
certainly would not be harmful and is something that might be used. Diets formulated for
patients with kidney insufficiency or for preventing calcium oxalate bladder stones are
restricted in calcium and may also be helpful. If a couple of months on a therapeutic diet
has not been helpful or if the ionized calcium level is especially high, it is important to add
in more aggressive therapy.
Bisphosphonates
Bone is shaped by osteocytes (cells that make new bone) and osteoclasts (cells that
dissolve bone). The osteocytes and osteoclasts work together to sculpt and build bone in
the correct shape. When osteoclasts dissolve bone, they release calcium into the
bloodstream which is just what we do not want in a hypercalcemic patient. The
bisphosphonate drugs, developed for women needing treatment for osteoporosis, can be
used to suppress the activity of osteoclasts, potentially reducing blood calcium levels.
Alendronate is the usual oral veterinary product and it is used once a week. Zoledronate is
given as an IV infusion.
Prednisone/Prednisolone
When it comes to hypercalcemia, prednisone enables the kidney to dump extra calcium
and potentially bring dangerously elevated calcium levels down to normal. There is an
important downside here, however. Lymphoma remains the most common cause of
hypercalcemia by far. Lymphoma cells are killed by prednisolone and a short-term
remission is induced. This sounds like it would be a good thing but in fact, it is not.
Suppose the hypercalcemic patient is put on prednisolone before proper testing has been
done. In that case, lymphoma may be almost impossible to find, thus making it almost
impossible to reach a definitive diagnosis. Worse still, the remission achieved by
prednisolone alone is short-lived and leaves the tumor resistant to other chemotherapy
drugs (thus making long-term remission all the more difficult to achieve). For this reason,
prednisolone treatment is a last resort and is only used when testing has been exhausted.

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 6/7
Saline Diuresis
Hospitalization with intravenous fluids will help maintain blood flow to the damaged
kidneys and may be useful. In general fluids not containing calcium are used.
Low doses of furosemide also help remove calcium from the bloodstream, but one must
be careful not to allow the patient to get dehydrated since furosemide is a diuretic
(meaning it increases urine production).
One can see that a surprise elevated calcium test is not something to ignore. Testing must
be swiftly performed so that treatment can be initiated without fear of making diagnosis
impossible. If you have further questions about hypercalcemia or the conditions leading to
it, do not hesitate to ask your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952098&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158332
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hypercalcemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952098&ind=231&objTypeID=1007 7/7

Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: July 05, 2016
Published: October 19, 2007
Hyperlipidemia is a general term for disorders in which too many fat molecules (called
lipids) circulate in the blood. The two most important lipids in pets are cholesterol and
triglycerides. Lipids are insoluble, meaning they are not easily dissolved in water. Because
blood is a watery substance, in order to move these insoluble lipids around within the
blood stream, the pet’s body forms lipoprotein complexes. Each of these complexes has
its own function. In a healthy animal, lipid levels typically rise for a short time after a meal
(known as lipemia) and then drop to a normal level. The problem of hyperlipidemia occurs
when certain conditions prevent the excess fat from leaving the blood stream, so that the
level of lipids remains high for far longer than nature intended (similar to sticky oil in a car
engine).
Hyperlipidemia can involve elevating one or more components of circulating fats and
lipoprotein complexes. It can involve hypertriglyceridemia (too many triglycerides),
hypercholesterolemia (cholesterol is too high), elevations in chylomicrons, etc.
Chylomicrons are the largest lipoproteins and are composed of triglycerides surrounded
by a protein coating. They are formed in the intestines from fats ingested in the diet and
they help move triglycerides out of the intestines in to various body tissues. They give the
blood a creamy, white appearance.
In pets, hyperlipidemia most often occurs as a consequence of some other disorder, such
as diabetes mellitus (sugar diabetes), hypothyroidism (low levels of circulating thyroid
hormones), Cushing’s disease (excessively high cortisone levels in the body), certain liver
diseases, and protein-losing nephropathy (a disease of the kidneys resulting in protein
loss in the urine). However, hyperlipidemia can also occur spontaneously after a meal of
high-fat foods, particularly table scraps.
Certain medications, such as progestogens and corticosteroids, can cause lipids to
increase. Your veterinarian needs to know what medications the pet is taking before
undertaking a search for primary diseases that can cause hyperlipidemia.
Hyperlipidemia is not a common problem in cats, but rarely cats can have a hereditary
disease that results in hyperlipidemia. In cats with the inherited disease, hyperlipidemia is
usually detected after the age of eight months.
Some dog breeds (miniature schnauzer, beagle, Shetland sheepdog, briard, rough collie,
and poodles) are predisposed to hyperlipidemia. Miniature schnauzers and beagles
usually develop the condition after the age of four years. What the genetic link might be in
dogs is not yet understood.
Signs
By itself, hyperlipidemia may not mean much clinically; however, signs are common with
some of the underlying metabolic disorders, such as diabetes. Some pets with
hyperlipidemia don’t have any signs at all.
Typical signs can include:

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952698&ind=232&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Lack of appetite, vomiting, diarrhea, abdominal discomfort
Acute pancreatitis, which can cause all the above signs plus severe abdominal
pain
Skin problems, such as hair loss or itching
Central nervous system signs, such as seizures
Inflammation inside one or both eyes that produces a cloudy appearance
Lipid deposits in certain tissues of the body, such as the skin, eyes, and blood
vessels
Diagnosis
There are many blood tests that can be used to diagnose hyperlipidemia and many of
these tests are relatively inexpensive. Prior to testing the blood the pet must fast for 12
hours, so the ideal time to take the test is first thing in the morning before breakfast.
A complete blood count, biochemistry panel (including triglyceride and cholesterol
measurements), urinalysis, and hormonal assays are usually performed to confirm
hyperlipidemia and to search for the cause. The blood sample may also be checked for
chylomicrons. More specialized tests to determine exactly which types of lipoproteins (for
example, low-density lipoprotein, very-low density lipoprotein, etc.) are in the blood can
also be done.
Treatment
When the hyperlipidemia is secondary to some other disease, then the treatment and
control of that disease becomes the major priority. A low-fat, high-fiber diet is also used to
reduce the fat content in the blood, along with some plain old common sense about
maintaining a healthy weight and providing the animal with enough exercise. Commercial
low-fat diets are available, but some pets detest the inherent lack of taste in these foods,
as animal fat is really flavorful. Although homemade diets can be made, they are
discouraged unless they have been formulated by a veterinary nutrition service because
they are often unbalanced in other important nutrients and unbalanced diets can cause
other medical problems. Many animals with hyperlipidemia will need to be on a low-fat diet
for life, just like people with high cholesterol problems.
If the pet likes to eat people food from the table or scraps from the trash, keeping him
away from this high-fat material is going to be important. Animals with hyperlipidemia are
prone to episodes of acute pancreatitis. If the pet manages to break into the trash or gets
access to high-fat foods, a visit to the veterinarian may be in order.
Fish oil supplements have been used to reduce high lipid levels in some animals,
depending upon the cause or source of the hyperlipidemia. You can discuss with your
veterinarian whether they are indicated for your pet. While fish oil supplements don’t
usually bring triglyceride values all the way down to normal, a partial reduction in the
levels can still be helpful.
Most lipid-lowering medications that are used in people, such as the statin drugs, are not
used in animals because of their tendency to cause cataracts and other side effects.
Other drugs and supplements, such as gemfibrozil and niacin, can have side effects, so
should be used only if diet and other methods haven't been successful in lowering the
numbers -- and only under your veterinarian's supervision.
Regular monitoring is needed to keep track of the pet's lipid levels. The timing and
frequency of recheck examinations and blood tests are often related to what monitoring is
needed for the underlying or primary disease. In general, however, if unexplainable
vomiting or diarrhea occurs, testing is usually done even if it’s earlier than expected or
scheduled.
Prognosis

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952698&ind=232&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Prognosis depends on a number of factors. If the lipids are just mildly elevated and not
associated with any other diseases, then they can often be controlled with dietary
changes. If the elevated lipids are associated with other metabolic diseases, then the
prognosis is most often related to that particular metabolic disease. (For example, acute
pancreatitis can be potentially fatal; however, mild cases usually are not life threatening.)
Animals with hereditary hyperlipidemia can be difficult to treat and also should not be used
for breeding.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952698&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158352
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:42 PM Hyperlipidemia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952698&ind=232&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Hypothyroidism in Dogs
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Revised: August 08, 2018
Published: November 24, 2003
What Is Hypothyroidism?
Hypothyroidism (underactive thyroid) results from decreased thyroid hormone production
by the thyroid glands, which are located in the neck near the voice box. It is seen most
commonly in middle-aged to older dogs. Affected dogs become easily fatigued, sleep for
longer periods of time, are often dull in their attitude and may seek a warm area in cold
weather. Slim breeds of dogs may seem puffy or over-weight, as the skin becomes
thickened in hypothyroidism. The hair coat becomes dry and loses sheen, the color dulls
and the hair may become very sparse, especially in areas of friction, with darkening of the
skin. Clipped hair may not regrow. Affected dogs may become prone to skin infections and
poor wound healing, as well as many internal health problems.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of hypothyroidism depends on taking blood samples to measure hormone
levels. Tests may include measuring total T4, free T4, TSH or a TSH stimulation test. In
some cases, diagnosis can be difficult and repeated testing is necessary.
Treatment
Treatment is by administration of oral thyroid hormone supplementation. There is
generally a rapid improvement in your pet's activity once treatment is started. However,
determining the right dosage of the thyroid supplement can take time. Additionally,
regrowth of the hair and lightening of the skin may take several months. Occasionally, a
pet may experience sensitivity to the amount of thyroid supplementation given. Signs
associated with this include a rapid heart rate, increased water consumption or urination,
change in temperament, or weight loss. Please contact your veterinarian if any of these
signs occur. Hypothyroidism treatment is life-long because there is no true cure. Blood
tests to measure hormone levels will need to be performed regularly to ensure that your
dog is getting enough thyroid hormone supplement.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952004&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158375
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952004&ind=233&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952004&ind=233&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Note the puffiness of the face forming the classic 'tragic
face' of hypothyroidism. Photo courtesy Dr. Carol Foil.
Thyroid Glands
Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance
of Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 27, 2024
Published: February 26, 2002
Hypothyroidism is a classic disease in
dogs as well as people. We know that
iodine deficiency leads to thyroid gland
swelling (a goiter) and thus most of the salt
we use is "iodized" to prevent this
deficiency. Dogs do not get goiters when
they become hypothyroid but they
experience the metabolic "slow down" that
comes with becoming hypothyroid.
Because of the importance of thyroid
hormone in metabolism, many organ
systems can be affected and multiple
symptoms are described. Diagnostic tests
can be just as confusing as the symptoms
but at least the treatment is relatively
straightforward.
We bring up these terms: T3, T4, TSH, and free T4 because these are the substances that
will be tested when it comes time to run diagnostics. Every cell in the body is affected by
it. Too much hormone and the heart races, blood pressure rises, and muscle and fat are
burned until the patient becomes skinny and debilitated. Too little hormone and the patient
becomes listless, overweight, and even bald in spots. Hypothyroidism is a medical
condition where the body is deficient in thyroid hormone. It would seem simple enough to
identify patients with hypothyroidism, test them, treat them and watch them return to
normal. Unfortunately, it is not as easy to identify affected patients as it might sound. Let's
review the issues relevant to this condition and the pitfalls that keep it from being a simple
problem.
What is the Thyroid Gland and What Does it do?
The thyroid gland forms an H in a person's throat,
though in dogs the thyroid exists as two separate
halves. The thyroid gland produces T4, which is an
inactive form of thyroid hormone. When T4 is
absorbed into tissue cells, it is converted into the
active form of thyroid hormone which is called
T3. Most of the circulating T4 is carried by blood
proteins and is not available for tissue absorption;
the portion that is not carried by proteins (the socalled free T4) is the portion that is able to enter
tissues for activation. The thyroid gland itself can
also activate T4 into T3. In dogs about half of the T3

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 1/6
The dog's thyroid glands are located on either
side of the windpipe (trachea). Graphic
courtesy MarvistaVet.
comes from the thyroid gland and the other half
comes from the body’s other tissues. In humans, 80
percent of T3 comes from activation in the body’s
other tissues.
Production of T4 is regulated by the pituitary gland
at the base of one’s brain. (This gland is called the
master gland as it regulates hormone production in
the adrenal system, the thyroid system, the
reproductive system, and more). The pituitary
produces a substance called thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH). When T4 levels are dropping, the
pituitary gland stimulates the thyroid gland to make
and release more T4.
Active thyroid hormone serves as a sort of volume
dial for metabolism. Since virtually every cell in the
body can be affected by reduced levels of thyroid
hormone, it is not surprising that reduced levels of
thyroid hormone lead to symptoms in multiple body
systems.
Manifestations of Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism results when there isn't enough T3. This generally happens because there
isn't enough T4. There isn't enough T4 because some kind of damage has occurred in the
thyroid gland. Thyroid gland damage can result from immune-mediated destruction of the
thyroid gland, by natural atrophy of the gland, dietary iodine deficiency, or a congenital
problem. In dogs, the first two causes listed account for almost all cases, though currently,
the feeling is that atrophy of the gland actually represents the end result of earlier
immune-mediated destruction of the gland.
Hypothyroidism generally develops in middle-aged or elderly dogs, with the average age
at diagnosis being 7 years. Breeds with a definite predisposition to develop
hypothyroidism include the Doberman pinscher, the Golden retriever, the Irish Setter, the
Great Dane, the Dachshund, and the Boxer.
Hypothyroidism is a classical disease with a classical collection of clinical signs. One
particularly well-done survey of 162 confirmed hypothyroid dogs showed the following
common findings:
88% had some kind of skin abnormality.
40% had hair loss (often this starts on the tail, leading to a rat tail appearance
or a bald area around the collar).
22% had skin infections (often, dogs are scaly and smelly due to an
excessively oily coat).
14% had brittle or dry coats (often, the outer hairs break off, leaving a short,
softer undercoat, classically described as a puppy-like coat).
49% were obese.
48% were described as lethargic or listless at home.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Hair loss on tail (rat tail). Photo courtesy
MarVistaVet
36% were anemic (had a reduced number of
red blood cells due to slowed red blood cell
production in the bone marrow). Elevated
blood cholesterol levels are also considered a
common finding of hypothyroidism.
One classical finding in hypothyroid dogs is a
thickening of some tissues, especially of the face and
head. The skin, in particular, thickens, leading to more
skin folds and what is referred to as a tragic face. This
thickening can occur in some other tissues as well
(such as facial nerves – see below).
Cardiovascular Signs
Hypothyroidism interferes with the electrical fibers that more or less provide the wiring for
the heart. The rhythmic contractions of the heart muscle are normally stimulated by these
electrochemical fibers. Abnormal rhythms or slow heart rate occur in as many as 26% of
hypothyroid dogs; still, the significance of this in terms of overall lifestyle is not clear. Many
specialists feel thyroid supplementation should be started at a lower dose for patients with
obvious heart disease.
Neurologic Signs
According to surveys of confirmed hypothyroid dogs, only about 2-4% have nerve
problems, but a more complete study in 2017 puts this number much higher at 29%.
There are several syndromes reported:
Polyneuropathy – In hypothyroidism, nerves simply do not conduct electrical
impulses normally. This may account for some of the general weakness and
listlessness seen in hypothyroidism. Response to thyroid hormone therapy is
rapid (improvement within the first week of treatment).
Focal Neuropathy – Single nerves can get entrapped as they exit the skull or
spinal cord as they (like other tissues) swell with thickening. Pressure on these
nerves can lead to paralysis of the facial muscles and/or head tilt, bizarre eye
motions, and balance disruption (vestibular disease).
Central Nervous System – may represent abnormal electrical conduction within
nerves; however, vascular disease has been found in hypothyroid dogs with
central nervous system signs. Clinical signs have involved ataxia (drunken
gait), hemiparesis (weakness in front and back legs on the same side of the
body), hypermetria (inappropriate measurement of steps), head tilt, circling,
and cranial nerve abnormalities. It may take several months of therapy to see a
response. Coma from thickening in the brain’s tissues is a rare possibility but
has been known to occur.
Ocular (Eye) Signs
Ocular changes are not common in hypothyroidism, but the high levels of blood
cholesterol and circulating fat can sometimes lead to eye changes. When these changes
are seen, often thyroid testing is recommended. Corneal dystrophy, an abnormal change
in the clear covering of the eye, is such an eye sign. This finding is usually represented as
a small white spot (sometimes a white circle) on the eye surface. To this degree, it is only
a cosmetic problem and does not interfere with vision. In more severe forms, painful
bubbles can erupt on the corneal surface which leads to ulceration. Obviously, this form
would require treatment.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 3/6
It sighthounds normally have much lower T4 levels than
other breeds. In Greyhounds, for example, the T4 levels
typically run about 50% of what other breeds do.
Interestingly, their T3 levels have the same normal range
as other breeds. Photo courtesy MarVistaVet.
Conditions not proven but previously suspected to be associated with hypothyroidism
include megaesophagus, laryngeal paralysis, infertility, and behavioral aggression. Despite
the potential for hypothyroidism to lead to symptoms in multiple organ systems, evidence
for these particular connections is considered tenuous.
Testing for Hypothyroidism
You would think testing for hypothyroidism would be simple: a blood test of the T3 or T4
level could be checked and if it is low, the patient is hypothyroid. Unfortunately, the
situation is rarely so simple.
Measurement of T3
If T3 is the active hormone, why can’t we just test blood levels of T3? Due to assorted
compensatory mechanisms, T3 levels often fluctuate into the normal range in even truly
hypothyroid dogs. This means that T3 values are virtually useless in diagnosing
hypothyroidism.
Measurement of T4
The T4 level (also called the total T4 level) is included in many routine screening blood
panels. It would seem that a low T4 would indicate hypothyroidism and a normal T4 would
indicate normal thyroid function. Unfortunately, it isn’t that simple. Dogs on certain drugs
(most notably seizure medications phenobarbital and potassium bromide; prednisone or
other corticosteroids; non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or NSAIDs; a heart medication
called propranolol; a behavior medication called clomipramine; or sulfa class antibiotics) or
with illnesses other than thyroid disease often have depressed T4 secretion. These dogs
will have low T4’s but are not hypothyroid. This means a normal T4 indicates normal
thyroid function but a low T4 may or may not indicate hypothyroidism. There is also a grey
zone where T4 results are considered not definitively normal and not definitively
abnormal. In short, T4 alone is not adequate to make a diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
It should be noted that the sighthounds normally have much lower T4 levels than other
breeds. In Greyhounds, for example, the T4 levels typically run about 50% of what other
breeds do. Interestingly, their T3 levels have the same normal range as other breeds.
Free T4
As mentioned, T4 is the precursor
hormone that is not active but is converted
by body tissues into T3, which is active. T4
exists in two forms: the form carried around
bonded to a blood protein (this is called
bound T4) and T4 floating around loose in
the bloodstream (called free T4). Only free
T4 can enter cells and be converted to T3
and the concentration of free T4
corresponds to thyroid hormone activity
where it counts (i.e., at the tissue level).
Free T4 levels are less subject to fluctuate
into a falsely low range in response to nonthyroidal diseases or drugs than is a total
T4 level.
Free T4 levels are typically 1000 times smaller than total T4 levels, plus tests for free T4
have to work in such a way so as not to convert bound T4 into free T4 and thus interfere
with results. Because of these two issues, it is somewhat difficult to test for free T4 and
the only acceptable way to do this is by a method called equilibrium dialysis. At this time,
most labs offer equilibrium dialysis-free T4, but it is important to realize that a free T4 level
on a lab report is not an equilibrium dialysis-free T4 unless it specifically says so.
Equilibrium dialysis-free T4 is sometimes notated fT4(ED).

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 4/6
TSH Stimulation and Endogenous TSH levels
Before there was readily available equilibrium dialysis-free T4, the test that was felt to be
the gold standard of reliability was called the TSH stimulation test. In this test, a T4 was
measured and then compared with a value drawn 8 hours after an injection of thyroid
stimulating hormone (TSH). The inability to respond to TSH was considered indicative of
hypothyroidism. The problem was the expense, the need for 8 hours of hospitalization,
and the fact that injectable TSH was frequently off the market. This test is rarely
performed nowadays.
TSH can be directly measured in a patient’s bloodstream. The idea is that the pituitary
gland should be secreting high levels of TSH in a futile attempt to stimulate a diseased
thyroid gland. Measurement of TSH levels is an important means of diagnosing
hypothyroidism in humans and a canine version of the test was long sought.
Unfortunately, when it finally became available, it was found that many dogs
(approximately 25% and possibly as high as 40%) with true hypothyroidism did not have
elevated TSH levels as one would expect; still, this test is often helpful in making the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
Antithyroglobulin Antibodies (The TGAA test)
Some thyroid testing panels include a measurement of antibodies against the thyroid
gland proteins from which thyroid hormones are made. The presence of these antibodies
confirms the immune-mediated form of hypothyroidism (though in later stages of this
disease, antibodies are no longer produced). The only significance of this test other than
academic interest is to identify patients that are positive for antibodies yet have normal
thyroid hormone tests. These animals have a 20% chance of becoming hypothyroid later
on, so regular periodic testing of thyroid hormone levels would be a good idea. Treatment
of hypothyroid animals that are positive for antibodies is the same as treatment for those
that are antibody-negative; the only practical use of the test is to identify animals at risk for
becoming hypothyroid later on.
Testing with a Trial of Medication
Sometimes, the only way to test for hypothyroidism is to simply give the medication for
several months and see what happens. Often, an improvement in attitude and energy
level is seen within the first week. Hair re-growth takes substantially longer (typically 4
months minimum) as the follicles must reawaken and then grow a hair long enough to be
seen.
Is the Diagnosis Correct?
Because of difficulties in diagnostic testing methods, many dogs have been erroneously
diagnosed with hypothyroidism and have been on medication for years. If there is any
question about a patient and you wish to re-test, thyroid hormone supplementation must
be discontinued for at least 2 months for blood testing to be valid. If possible, medications
known to interfere with testing should be discontinued for testing (though this is obviously
not always possible).
Treatment of Hypothyroidism
At least the treatment of hypothyroidism is relatively straightforward; hypothyroidism is
treated with oral administration of thyroid hormone (T4). Even hypothyroid dogs are
perfectly capable of converting T4 to T3. Pills are given usually twice daily to start but may
be dropped to once a day after good thyroid control has been achieved.
There are many brands of thyroid supplementation available and prices are somewhat
variable depending on the manufacturer.
Treatment is given for the rest of the dog's life.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 5/6
Occasionally veterinarians are asked if it is reasonable to use dried or powdered thyroid
glands of hogs or cattle as a more natural form of treatment. The answer is simply no.
These products are not produced with adequate quality control to ensure that they contain
a reliable amount of thyroid hormone. Each dose may be completely different when such
a product is used.
Re-testing
Whenever an animal goes on a medication long term, periodic blood testing is a good
idea. In the case of hypothyroidism treatment, it is important to know if the medication
dose is too low or too high. Thyroxine (T4) is a safe medication but if it is not given in
adequate doses, obviously the patient will not be adequately treated. If the dose is too
high and given for too long a time, excessive water consumption, weight loss, and
restlessness can result.
Monitoring with T4
The lowest thyroid level of the day is found by taking the blood sample right before a
tablet would normally be given. The highest level of the day is found by taking the blood
sample 4 to 6 hours after it is given. Expect one or both such tests to be periodically
recommended. Our hospital recommends some type of blood test monitoring annually.
Monitoring with TSH level
The canine thyroid stimulating hormone level (abbreviated cTSH) does not seem to
require any particular timing issues and can be run on a blood sample taken at any time of
the day. The cTSH level will not indicate whether or not the thyroid dose is too high but is
quite accurate at determining if the level is too low. (Inadequate treatment is associated
with high TSH levels, indicating that the pituitary gland is vainly trying to stimulate the
thyroid gland with high levels of stimulating hormone). This test may be run instead of or
in addition to a T4 level when it comes time to monitor thyroid hormone treatment.
Other Hypothyroidism Resources
The Orthopedics Foundation for Animals has extended its registry to include many nonorthopedic conditions including hypothyroidism. See information on registration, statistical
trends in different breeds, etc. at their website.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951353&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158396
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Hypothyroidism is the Most Common Hormone Imbalance of Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951353&ind=234&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 31, 2024
Published: February 09, 2010
Insulin is the injectable medication you
use to control your diabetic dog’s blood
sugar. When insulin therapy is first
started, the optimal dose for your pet will
be unknown and will have to be
determined by trial and error.
Most dogs will need insulin injections
twice a day, though occasionally, a patient
is found where a single dose is longacting and once-a-day insulin works out. A
dose will be selected based on what
research has shown to be a good starting
point, and after a week or two, a glucose
"curve" will be needed to map out the
blood sugar levels over the day. This has
traditionally been done in the hospital with
blood glucose samplings done every 2
hours during the hospital's hours of
operation. Alternatively, a continuous
monitor such as a FreeStyle Libre®
(made for human use) can be implanted
on the pet's skin. Several curves can be
obtained at home via a special reader or
cell phone. The curve or curves will show if the insulin is lasting long enough and if the
dose should be raised, lowered, or kept the same.
Alternatively, you can learn how to monitor your dog’s blood glucose levels yourself, but if
you are a beginner, you may want to master giving the injections before moving on to
taking blood samples. If you become proficient at glucose sampling, you can perform the
curve at home and message the results to your veterinarian, skipping the stress and
expense of a hospital visit. This may not seem like a valuable technique to learn now that
continuous monitors can be implanted, but going forward, you may want to be able to
periodically (or even regularly) do glucose spot checks at home, and for that, you would
need your own glucose meter and glucose strips.
There are several insulins used in the management of diabetic dogs. Vetsulin®, Humulin
N®, and Novalin N® are intermediate-acting insulins. Vetsulin® is of pork origin, but pork
and dog insulin are identical, so Vetsulin®, (also called "Caninsulin" in other countries) is a
veterinary product. Humulin N and Novalin N are human insulins available from human
pharmacies. ProZinc® insulin is another veterinary insulin, while Glargine insulin and its
variations are human products, all designed to last a bit longer than Vetsulin®, Humulin N
and Novalin N. Vetsulin®, Humulin N, Novalin N, and Glargine are available in both vials
(where one draws insulin out with a syringe) and pens (where a dose is dialed in and a

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Insulin Administration in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952915&ind=235&objTypeID=1007 1/5
button is pressed to deliver the injection). ProZinc is available only in a vial. Human
insulins are much more concentrated than veterinary insulins and require special syringes.
Many people prefer the ease of the pen, but it can be tricky if half-unit doses are needed
depending on which insulin pen we are talking about.
Be sure you understand how much insulin you are supposed to give your pet.
Do not change your pet's insulin dose without veterinary guidance.
Storing Insulin
Insulin does not require refrigeration, but since many insulins do not contain
preservatives, it is best to refrigerate the product since we want it to last a couple of
months without bacterial contamination. Human diabetics frequently do not refrigerate
their insulin at all, but as human doses are substantially larger than animal doses, the vial
or pen will not need to last nearly as long. The bottom line is that it is best to refrigerate
the pen or vial to maximize the shelf life of the product. Unopened vials or pens should be
stored in the refrigerator.
Do not use insulin that is past its expiration date.
It is a good idea to change to a fresh bottle every 6 to 8 weeks. That being said,
the standard in veterinary medicine is to keep it longer; 4-6 months as long as
the insulin is refrigerated and not discolored. Please consult your veterinarian
about what will work best for you and your pet.
Do not use insulin that has been frozen. Insulin is not normally frozen, but
accidents happen, especially in smaller refrigerators.
Do not expose insulin to direct light or heat.
Syringes for Use with Vials
Human and veterinary insulins are made at different concentrations, and thus, each
requires its own type of syringe for proper dosing. Insulin syringes are extremely small in
diameter so that injection will not be painful. It is a rare patient that objects to insulin shots
per se, but some dogs resent being held still. It is crucial that the injection goes into the
dog rather than into the fur of the dog. The best area for injection is around the shoulders
but, if possible, the area of the injection should be changed up with each injection from
right to left for best insulin absorption.
Vetsulin® is available at 40 units of insulin per cc and requires U-40 syringes.
Humulin N is available at 100 units of insulin per cc and requires U-100
syringes.
Always be sure you have the correct syringes for your insulin.
Used syringes should be placed inside a thick plastic container, such as a liquid laundry
detergent bottle or similar receptacle. If the needle is enclosed in such a container, the
entire container can be closed up and disposed of in the regular trash at home. Specific
containers can be purchased for needle disposal, or the used syringes can be returned to
your veterinary hospital for disposal if you prefer. Some states, such as California, have
specific regulations for disposing of used insulin syringes (commonly called sharps).
How to Give the Injections

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Insulin Administration in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952915&ind=235&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Insulin is drawn into the syringe after holding the
bottle upside down. Photo courtesy Teri Ann
Oursler, DVM
Photo courtesy of MarVistaVet.
First, feed your dog.
A dog's blood sugar that has not eaten a normal
meal but receives insulin may drop to a
dangerously low level. If your dog is not eating,
this could indicate a need for a checkup with your
veterinarian.
After the dog has eaten, you are ready to give the
injection. (Note, there is an exception to this rule.
Novalin N appears to last longer if given before
feeding. No one knows why this is and, as
mentioned, this practice runs the risk of giving
insulin to a pet that may not offset the insulin
dose with calories.)
Before drawing up the insulin, it is important to be
sure that the insulin is properly mixed as some of
it will settle on the bottom of the vial. The
manufacturer of Vetsulin® recommends simply
shaking the bottle until the contents are uniformly
milky.
The manufacturers of other insulins recommend gently rolling the bottle in the palms of
your hands or rocking it back and forth lightly to mix. The only product that should be
shaken to mix is Vetsulin®.
When drawing up the insulin, always hold the bottle vertically and upside down to avoid
unnecessary bubbles in the syringe. (See photo.) Since insulin is being given under the
skin, bubbles are not an enormous problem as it would be with an intravenous injection
but we still want to minimize bubbles. If you get bubbles in the syringe, flick the syringe
with your fingers until the bubbles rise to the top, and then simply push the air out of the
syringe with the plunger.
After you have the insulin dose
ready in the syringe, it is time to
get your dog. Be sure you can
trust your dog to hold reasonably
still for the shot. Most dogs do not
require a second person to hold
them still but some dogs are
rambunctious and a helper is
necessary. If you have such a pet
but no helper, consider tying a
short leash around a piece of
furniture. (Use a slip knot in case
of a choking emergency.) Some
dogs are uncooperative and
require a muzzle.
Lift up a fold of skin, ideally along
the side of the body. This will create a small space for the needle. Insert the needle into
this space and inject the insulin. Withdraw the syringe and needle when you are finished.
Insulin by Pen
An insulin pen is a gadget that allows precision insulin measurements and push-button
ease of administration. The gadget is called a pen because it is shaped like a writing pen.
A cartridge of insulin is snapped inside, and a small needle tip is applied to the pen tip (a
new tip should be used each time). The dose is dialed in with accuracy up to the half unit,

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Insulin Administration in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952915&ind=235&objTypeID=1007 3/5
which is much more accurate than trying to eyeball tiny doses with a syringe. The pen is
primed with a dose before it is used on the patient. You insert the needle through the pet's
skin and press a button at the top. The needle must stay in place for at least five seconds
to ensure the full dose has been delivered. Most people find this method of insulin delivery
easier than using syringes.
Most human insulins are available as pens, but Vetsulin® is the only veterinary insulin
available in a pen. Vetsulin® pens are sold separately from their insulin cartridges. The
cartridges should be stored upright, though the loaded pen may be stored on its side.
Most human insulin pens are disposable and cannot be reloaded.
Pens cannot be refrigerated without disrupting their measuring mechanism. This means
that the insulin cartridge within the pen is good for about six weeks before it must be
discarded and replaced. The needle's tips should be disposed of with the same
precautions as for syringe disposal.
Giving injections and becoming comfortable with needles may seem intimidating at first
but you will most likely be surprised at how easy it quickly becomes. Managing a diabetic
pet is definitely a project but can be a very rewarding one. If you have any questions or
problems, remember your veterinarian's office is available for demonstrations or to answer
your questions as they come up.
It is our policy not to give dosing information over the Internet.
Related resources
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Glipizide (Glucotrol) - April 9, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952915&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158419

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Insulin Administration in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952915&ind=235&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:43 PM Insulin Administration in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952915&ind=235&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Photo courtesy marvistavet.com
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 13, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
Once there is some reason to suspect
Cushing's disease based on the history,
physical examination, and initial
laboratory testing, it is necessary to do
specific testing to confirm it. There are
several options.
Canine Cushing's Disease Testing
The Low Dose Dexamethasone
Suppression Test
Usually takes eight hours in the hospital
Dexamethasone is a cortisone-type
hormone that is used therapeutically for
numerous conditions. When given
dexamethasone, the dog's pituitary gland
will perceive that there is a steroid and
shut off its stimulatory message to the
adrenal glands. In a normal animal, this
means that a drop in blood cortisol level
will be seen eight hours after a tiny dose
of dexamethasone is given intravenously.
If either the pituitary tumor or the adrenal
tumor form of Cushing's disease is present, the
pituitary is not responsive to the presence of
dexamethasone and continues to produce its
stimulatory message regardless. As a result, no
drop in cortisol level is seen at the end of eight
hours.
This test is currently considered the most
accurate to confirm Cushing's disease.
Approximately 90 percent of dogs with
Cushing's disease will test positive for it.
To Run this Test
Ideally, the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test is run in the morning. A baseline
cortisol level is measured, a low dose of
dexamethasone is given intravenously, and blood
samples are checked again in 8 hours.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951511&ind=236&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Sometimes, a 4-hour sample is also drawn, as the pattern of suppression over the entire 8
hours may help classify the type of Cushing's disease. The pet will require at least 8 hours
in the hospital.
The ACTH Stim Test - Requires one to two hours in the hospital
Central to the concept of Cushing’s disease is the over-production of cortisol. It follows
then that the adrenal glands of the Cushing’s patient would possess large amounts of
stored cortisol hormone. So how are these unusually large amounts of stored hormone vs.
normal detected? A dose of ACTH (adrenocorticotrophic hormone) is given, which is the
hormone the pituitary gland uses to stimulate the release of cortisol. Basically, a dose of
ACTH is given, checking for a normal cortisol release or an extra-large one.
A baseline cortisol level is drawn, the ACTH is given as a injection. In one-to-two hours, a
second cortisol level is measured to compare. This way, the adrenal gland's ability to
release cortisol is measured (by seeing if it responds to the ACTH injection).
Test Requirements
Ideally, the patient is fasted overnight, and the test is performed in the morning between 8
a.m. and 10 a.m. A blood sample is drawn, a dose of ACTH is given, and two hours later,
a second blood sample is drawn.
When Would This Test Be Required?
Given that the Low-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression test is more accurate, when might
we run this test instead? It turns out that this is the only test that can be used if Cushing's
disease from overuse of steroid medications is suspected; the low-dose dexamethasone
suppression test does not work if medications have suppressed the patient's natural
system. The ACTH Stim test is also crucial in monitoring Cushing's patients during their
treatment. This test is more specific than the low-dose dexamethasone suppression test,
meaning that the strongly positive dogs definitely have Cushing's disease (false positives
are unusual), but since it is not a very sensitive test, the University of California Veterinary
School no longer recommends this test to determine whether or not a dog has Cushing's
disease. This is, as mentioned, the test that is used to monitor the treatment of Cushing's
disease, however, and a dog being treated for Cushing's disease will likely look forward to
many ACTH Stimulation tests ahead.
The Urine Cortisol/Creatinine Ratio
This is a screening test for Cushing's disease; a positive test here does NOT confirm
Cushing's syndrome, but a negative test DOES rule it out. In this test, a single urine
sample is collected to determine the relative amounts of cortisol and creatinine (creatinine
is a protein metabolite that is constantly excreted in urine). If there is a high ratio - a
relatively high amount of cortisol being excreted - further testing is needed. Ideally, for this
test, the urine sample is collected at home so that cortisol secreted in response to the
stress of visiting the vet's office does not interfere with the results.
Feline Cushing's Disease Testing
The Low Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
The testing situation is somewhat similar in cats, though the ACTH Stim test is generally
not considered useful.
This test is performed similar to the way it is performed with dogs; however, the dose of
dexamethasone required to test a cat is substantially higher as cats are more resistant to
the effects of steroids. The test still requires eight hours in the hospital, and the cat should
be relaxed and kept quiet during the stay. If the cat is the type to experience a great deal
of stress in visiting the vet's office, consider the urine cortisol:creatinine ratio.
The Urine Cortisol/Creatinine Ratio

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951511&ind=236&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Your pet will need to stay at your veterinarian's office for a few hours for
testing.
This test provides an
excellent screening test for
Cushing's disease in cats and
can be performed by
including a high-dose
dexamethasone suppression
test to further categorize
Cushing's disease and
determine the best treatment.
The owner should bring urine
samples collected first thing
in the morning on three
consecutive mornings.
Having the sample collected
at home removes the
possibility of interference
from vet visit-induced stress.
The first two samples are
used to determine if the cat
has Cushing's disease, and the ratios are averaged. On the second day (after the second
sample is brought in), dexamethasone pills are given to the cat at home, and the sample
from the third day is used to determine the type of Cushing's disease the cat has.
Collecting a cat's urine at home is easier than it sounds. The cat is confined overnight
and, in the morning, is allowed access to the litter box. The easiest way to collect the urine
is to place a cellophane sheet over the box. The cat will wrinkle this up a bit, scratching
around, but only a small amount needs to be caught on the surface of the cellophane. A
syringe can be used to suck up the sample and store it for transport to the veterinary
clinic.
No blood drawing is needed, and the cat does not have to come to the vet's office for the
test. The problem is that urine cortisol:creatinine ratios may be too sensitive and may
generate false positives. For this reason, most experts recommend the low-dose
dexamethasone suppression test as the screening test of choice for cats.
It is important to note a diagnosis of Cushing's disease, but it is equally important to
consider that successful treatment of Cushing's is about controlling symptoms. If the
symptoms do not warrant control, then treatment should be postponed until they are more
problematic. After it has been determined that a pet has it, it is important to determine the
type of Cushing's disease (adrenal vs. pituitary tumor). The next section classifies the type
of Cushing's reviews and how they are done. Treatment options and prognosis highly
depend on the type of Cushing's disease the pet has.
Related resources
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951511&ind=236&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951511&pid=19239
e25ac9dd-109b-4014-91c8-d54e8f7a76d0.1754158440
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951511&ind=236&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 07, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
When an animal sees the veterinarian for
a potential clinical problem, an initial
database is collected in the form of a
blood panel and urinalysis, and possibly a
urine culture. There are some tip offs to
Cushing's syndrome that may be noted
and added to the list of observed
symptoms as evidence.
The Stress Leukogram
This term refers to the relative proportions
of different types of white blood cells.
There is a typical pattern produced by
cortisol as the body responds to stress.
This pattern is called a stress leukogram.
If this pattern is seen in a patient that
does not seem stressed, there is a
possibility that an excess of cortisol is
present.
The stress leukogram classically involves:
Elevated neutrophil count
Lowered lymphocyte count
Lowered eosinophil count
These are all types of white blood cells counted in a test called a complete blood count (or
CBC for short). You don't need to know what those cells do; it is the pattern of increases
and decreases that suggests cortisol is afoot.
Elevated Alkaline Phosphatase
Alkaline phosphatase (often abbreviated ALP or SAP) is one of the so-called liver
enzymes, meaning that it is chiefly found in the liver. There is a form of this enzyme that is
produced in high levels in response to cortisol. This enzyme is not harmful in excess
levels but since such marked increases in its levels are associated with cortisol, this would
be a good hint that either this patient is taking cortisone-type medications or has
Cushing's disease.
Elevated Cholesterol
This is a common finding in most endocrine diseases and, in this case, results from
abnormal fat mobilization. High levels of circulating cholesterol may, as in humans, alter
normal circulation and blood clotting.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951503&ind=237&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Image courtesy of CDC Public Health
Image Library
Image courtesy of MarVistaVet
These classic laboratory findings complement the
physical examination and may lead your
veterinarian to recommend definitive testing for
Cushing's syndrome. Not all of these findings need
be present to suggest further testing for Cushing's
Syndrome but the suggestion is stronger as more of
these hints are detected.
Unconcentrated Urine and/or Bladder Infection
When a pet drinks excessive amounts of water, the extra
water is passed as urine. As long as there is extra water,
urine will be dilute. Because of the immunosuppression
associated with Cushing's disease, there may be
evidence of bacterial infection as well, or such evidence
may be concealed by the dilution of the urine. Ideally
urine should be cultured if it is too dilute to reliably detect
white blood cells or blood. Recent studies have shown
that 20 percent of dogs with Cushing's disease have an
inapparent bladder infection.
Feline Cushing's Disease is a Little Bit Different
The classical screening test findings seen in dogs
are not typically seen in cats. Most cats with
Cushing's disease do not have a stress leukogram
as described above. They do not have elevations
in cholesterol or liver enzymes and their thyroid
levels tend to run in the normal range. Most cats
with Cushing's disease are diabetic and have
findings referable to that. Classically the cat with
Cushing's disease has especially intractable
diabetes mellitus and diabetic control seems to
require high insulin doses if it can be controlled at
all. It is generally the diabetes mellitus that is
diagnosed first in a cat with Cushing's disease. If
the diabetes does not respond to insulin as
expected, underlying causes are sought and one
of these is Cushing's disease. For more
information on other possibilities, read about hard
to regulate diabetic cats.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951503&ind=237&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951503&pid=19239
c66728e6-9a6c-4ebf-a5d2-6e80c74f5f3f.1754158465
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951503&ind=237&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Original illustration by MarVistaVet
Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 18, 2023
Published: October 28, 2007
Meet the Thyroid Glands
The two thyroid glands are located in the throat,
nestled just behind the larynx on either side of the
windpipe. These glands are responsible for making
and storing thyroid hormones, in particular thyroxine
which is also called T4. This hormone is released
and then activated by the body’s tissues into
triiodothyronine or T3. Triiodothyronine (T3) acts as a
sort of volume dial for metabolism, controlling how
fast our cells burn fuel, while thyroxine (T4) is an
inactive form. There is actually quite a long story
involving how these hormones work, and how an
assortment of inactive forms are made and shifted
back to activity again, but that story is for another
time. Today’s story is not about healthy thyroids and
their activity but about thyroid malignancy. The
situation is a little different between dogs and cats so
we’ll discuss them separately.
Canine
Thyroid tumor in dogs generally does not affect the production of thyroid hormones. This
means there is nothing to detect on a screening lab report that would indicate a tumor; a
dog with a thyroid tumor is usually neither hypothyroid nor hyperthyroid. The tumor is
usually detected when someone, usually either the owner at home or the veterinarian
during the examination, notices a lump around the dog’s throat. The lump may deeply
adhere, potentially altering the dog’s voice or ability to swallow, or the lump may be fairly
moveable. The average age at tumor detection is nine years, and there is no gender
predilection. Some studies have suggested that the following breeds are predisposed to
developing thyroid carcinoma: Boxer, Beagle, and Golden Retriever.
In canine thyroid carcinomas, approximately one dog in five will be hyperthyroid.
So what happens after a lump is detected?
The goal at this point is to assess the dog for general health and for potential tumor
spread as well as to identify the lump. The initial assessment of a dog with a throat lump
should include a physical examination, a basic database of blood and urine testing
including a T4 level, and a set of chest radiographs (x-rays) to check for obvious tumor
spread. After these basic tests are completed, some special tests are needed to identify
the lump/growth.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952703&ind=238&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Canine thyroid carcinoma imaged by scintigraphy. The
dog's nose is pointing upward. The two red spots are the
salivary glands (which take up i-131) and the large red
spot is the tumor. The image shows the dog's head and
neck. Image provided by Michael R. Broome, DVM, MS,
Dipl. ABVP and AVMI
There are several procedures that could be
performed to identify the growth. If the
growth is loose and fairly moveable in an
accessible area, the easiest procedure may
be to simply remove and biopsy it. This
provides the most accurate means of
identifying the growth and may even prove
curative. The problem is that often thyroid
carcinoma is extremely vascular and deeply
adhered to the deeper structures of the
throat, which means that surgery may not be
so simple.
A less invasive option is a fine needle
aspirate. Here, a needle is inserted into the
growth, and cells are withdrawn with a
syringe. A sample is submitted to the lab for
analysis. This is not nearly as accurate as a
biopsy when it comes to distinguishing
benign from malignant thyroid disease but
greater than 90% of the time this procedure
will at least identify the growth as thyroid in
origin. Since statistics indicate a thyroid
growth is malignant 87% of the time, this
goes a long way to identify it as a thyroid carcinoma. Cytology only detects malignancy
directly in about 50 percent of the samples where the tumor later proved to be malignant;
in most cases, we can infer malignancy simply by knowing that the cytology confirmed
thyroid cells.
In dogs, there is an 87% chance that a thyroid growth is malignant.
How do we treat thyroid carcinomas?
Treatment depends on several factors: how deeply invasive the tumor is and whether
there is already measurable tumor spread. Three imaging techniques can be used, and
which are sometimes combined, to answer these questions: ultrasound, scintigraphy
(nuclear medicine), and MRI.
Ultrasound uses sound waves to image the deeper structures of the throat and determine
the feasibility of removing the primary tumor. This method is non-invasive, and many
hospitals have the necessary equipment available. If surgery is being considered,
ultrasound might be an especially helpful choice as it will indicate whether surgical
resection is even possible.
Scintigraphy is especially helpful in detecting tumor spread. Here, a radioactive material
called pertechnetate is given intravenously. It follows a similar course as iodine would,
iodine being an important component of thyroid hormone. This means that the nuclear
medicine image can reveal areas of thyroid tissue in all sorts of inappropriate areas
indicating the extent of tumor spread. Scans are reasonably priced but not necessarily
available in all areas; one has to be lucky enough to live near a nuclear medicine facility.
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is another way of detecting the depth of a tumor and
possibly tumor spread. A highly detailed image is produced, but imaging requires general
anesthesia and is expensive. Again, not every area has a facility that can perform this kind
of imaging, but one could potentially be in an area with MRI access but without
scintigraphy access, so an MRI might come to be a helpful tool in tumor assessment.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952703&ind=238&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Studies show that 16% to 38% of dogs with thyroid carcinoma have evidence of
tumor spread at the time of diagnosis.
Larger tumors are more likely to spread faster than smaller tumors.
When the thyroid carcinoma spreads, it usually goes to the lymph nodes of the
throat and neck and to the lungs.
Treatment
After the tumor has been assessed for spread and for depth, appropriate therapy can be
selected.
Surgery
If the tumor is freely moveable and no tumor spread can be detected, surgery is probably
the best choice. A median survival time of three years was reported in one retrospective
study of such cases. In February 2023, Enache et al published a study reviewing 144
dogs with thyroid carcinomas. Here are some interesting statistics:
77% of the dogs survived >500 days. The median survival time was 802 days.
In a third retrospective study of such cases, a median survival time of 20.5 months was
reported. If, however, the tumor is invasive and not mobile, excision will probably not be
complete and will likely have complications such as nerve damage or excessive
bleeding. It is best in this situation to pursue a different therapy.
External Beam Radiation Therapy
This form of therapy requires referral to a special radiation oncologist and such facilities
may not be readily available. In this therapy, the primary tumor in the throat is irradiated,
typically three times weekly. The tumor responds slowly (peak effect is usually seen 8 to
22 months after the treatment course has been completed). In one study of eight dogs, a
median survival time of 24.5 months was found. Side effects include a hoarse voice,
cough, and difficulty swallowing (usually, complications were self-limiting and resolved in
2-3 weeks). Later complications include baldness at the radiation site and dry cough in
fewer than 20% of patients. This type of therapy can be combined with surgery to
improve the outcome.
Radioiodine Therapy
As in hyperthyroid cats with benign thyroid nodules, iodine 131 can be used to treat
thyroid carcinoma in dogs. The advantage of this therapy is that the iodine can travel to
areas of tumor spread and be sequestered there. Iodine 131 emits beta particles (highspeed electrons) penetrating and destroying tissue for only a fraction of an inch. This
means the normal tissue is spared around the tumor, and only the tumor is treated. In one
study, this therapy yielded a median survival time of 30 months. Much higher doses of
iodine 131 are used in this situation than in the feline treatment of hyperthyroidism. This
translates to most dogs requiring thyroid supplementation at the end of therapy as there
will probably not be enough normal thyroid tissue left. As for other downsides, a special
diet is sometimes recommended prior to therapy to maximize the uptake of iodine 131 so
as to enhance the tumor’s response. Further, for a time after therapy, the dog is
radioactive and must be confined to a radio facility temporarily until their radiation
emission drops to a safe level. Most seriously, there is a risk of fatal bone marrow
suppression that goes with this type of radiotherapy though this risk is small (less than
10%).
Chemotherapy is under investigation as a treatment for thyroid carcinoma, but protocols
are still being worked out. Toceranib has been a promising medication plus there is some
evidence that treatment with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) suppresses

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952703&ind=238&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Bilateral asymmetric adenomas in a cat. We are looking
down on the cat's front quarters as an aerial view. The
cat's nose faces the top of the frame. The salivary glands
appear as symmetrical red spots. The tumor is the large
white spot in the area of the neck. The front legs can be
seen alongside the neck. Image provided by Michael R.
Broome, DVM, MS, Dipl. ABVP and AVMI
the progression of many types of carcinomas. The use of these medications may be a
helpful adjunctive treatment.
Feline
While canine thyroid carcinomas do not
usually produce the excess hormone, the
opposite is true in cats; cats with thyroid
carcinomas are usually hyperthyroid.
Hyperthyroidism is an extremely common
situation in older cats and the thyroid growth
involved is benign in over 95% of cases.
This makes finding less than 5 percent of
cats with malignancy all the more difficult to
distinguish.
A pertechnetate scan is needed to make the
distinction. If the owner is considering
radiotherapy for the treatment of
hyperthyroidism, the malignancy should be
identified as the scan normally precedes
radiotherapy. If the owner is opting for
another treatment (surgery, or oral
medication), the scan may not happen, and
the diagnosis will be missed.
In most cases when cats receive
radiotherapy for their hyperthyroidism, a
pertechnetate nuclear medicine scan
(scintigraphy) is performed to confirm the
diagnosis and to determine the dose of
iodine 131 needed to control the thyroid
disease. If the thyroid growth is malignant,
there are generally clues on the scan
suggesting that the tumor mass is more extensive than the more routine benign thyroid
growths. Assorted image criteria are used to make this determination but, of course, there
is no substitute for harvesting an actual tissue sample.
So when would you consider such a biopsy given that over 95% of thyroid growths are
benign? If the standard hyperthyroidism therapies (medication or radiotherapy) fail to
control thyroid levels, then there is a reason to pursue malignancy as the explanation.
Obviously, if the hyperthyroid cat is treated with surgical removal of the thyroid glands
(rarely done nowadays given the availability of radiotherapy and medication), then the
tissue would be biopsied to definitively settle the benign/malignant question. Right now,
the treatment of hyperthyroidism generally consists of a choice between radiotherapy,
medication, and possibly dietary therapy. The scan done in conjunction with radiotherapy
is probably the best way to identify the small group of cats that have malignant disease.
Since cats with benign or malignant thyroid tumors are generally hyperthyroid, it should
not be surprising that radiotherapy is probably the best treatment in either situation.
Thyroid tumors readily take up radioiodine regardless of whether they are benign or
malignant. In one study, cats with malignant thyroid tumors who received radioiodine
therapy were not only cured of their hyperthyroidism, but also the median survival from
their cancer was approximately three years. In cats with thyroid tumors who were not also
hyperthyroid, treatment is a little trickier. The pertechnetate scan helps determine the
tumor's ability to absorb radioiodine. If the tumor is not going to take up radioiodine, then
some other therapy (surgery or external beam radiation) is a better choice.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952703&ind=238&objTypeID=1007 4/5
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952703&pid=19239
c66728e6-9a6c-4ebf-a5d2-6e80c74f5f3f.1754158486
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:44 PM Malignant Thyroid Tumors in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952703&ind=238&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 18, 2023
Published: February 09, 2010
Monitoring is crucial to determining your pet’s proper insulin dose. Much monitoring can
be done at home, and it is possible to save a great deal of money by doing so; however,
some tests simply must be done at the veterinarian’s office. Different tests complement
each other so expect to be an active participant in the monitoring process.
If you will be monitoring glucose levels at home, be sure to ask your
veterinarian what the minimum glucose level for skipping an insulin dose
should be for your pet. If the glucose starts low, it will get even lower (and
possibly too low) if you give more insulin.
Monitoring at Home
There are three ways to participate:
Continuous monitoring technology
Glucometer
Urine dipstick monitoring
You may end up using all three methods and don't forget the importance of simply
watching how your pet feels in general. Is there excess thirst? Is there an excess
appetite? Is a healthy weight being maintained?
Continuous Monitoring: The FreeStyle Libre Device
The FreeStyle Libre device is a human glucose monitoring system that can be adapted to
dogs and cats easily. For pets, a spot is shaved, usually on the shoulder or flank, and a
round glucose sensor is implanted such that the sensor monitors tissue glucose levels. A
scanner is provided (or you can use your cell phone) which can wirelessly communicate
with the sensor. In this way, glucose can be checked simply by scanning the pet, and no
blood collection is needed. The sensor must be replaced every two weeks (generally done
at the vet's office as shaving the skin is involved). The kit and sensors can be obtained
from most human pharmacies. Your veterinarian must prescribe the system for you.
Once data has been scanned, it is displayed on the LibreView website, and your
veterinarian can check glucose level patterns throughout the day from any computer.
Advantages of this method:
The pet does not have to go to the vet's office for glucose sampling. Going to
the vet is stressful and can alter glucose levels. When the data is obtained at
home, a more accurate record is obtained.
No blood sampling is needed. The device reads subcutaneous glucose levels
(which technically lag behind blood sugar levels by 15 minutes, but this rarely

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Orange tabby cat wearing a FreeStyle Libre
device. Photo by MarVista Vet
comes into play.)
You and your vet can view several
consecutive days of data in one sitting.
You will need to provide the times when
insulin was given and when the pet was
fed. These can be added to the computer
portal.
Disadvantages of this method:
Many pets will not tolerate the device and
pull it off as soon as possible. A sweater
or T-shirt may be needed to protect the
device. While the device is capable of
lasting 14 days on a patient, it is a rare patient that wears the device for the full
14-day period. A dislodged device cannot be re-implanted.
The device is made for human use and humans do not have the extensive
subcutaneous space that animals have. It is possible that the needle sensor will
not be long enough to get accurate readings.
Only one device can pair with the sensor. This can be a phone or a reader but
not both. Make sure you have the device and scan regularly.
Implantation can fail and you will have to get a new device. (It's smart to always
have a spare.)
Some pet owners like their pet to always wear a Libre so they can check a glucose level
at any time and some only use it when a set of curves is needed (after an insulin dose
changes, after a change in the patient's status).
This continuous monitor has changed the way diabetes mellitus is monitored and its use is
strongly encouraged.
The Glucometer and Lancets
In a more traditional form of monitoring, a glucometer can be used to monitor pet glucose
levels at home. This involves obtaining a small blood sample with a lancet device and
doing so on a regular basis. Not every owner is able to accomplish this feat and not every
pet is amenable to the process, but many people and many pets are perfectly fine with it.
In the past, human glucometers were used to monitor dog and cat blood sugars. The
problem with doing this is that accuracy at higher values was not reliable. Trends were
easy to see but more precise measurements were not possible to obtain. Today, there are
several veterinary glucometers on the market, and we recommend buying one of these for
best results. (The Alpahtrak meter is often used, but there are many others.)
The meter will come as a kit and provides links to instructional videos from the
manufacturer along with written/illustrated guides for use. Blood collection instructions are
also included, though we have added some links here as well. A test strip is inserted in the
meter and a drop of blood is touched to it. The glucose value is displayed in a few
seconds.
Taking Blood: Watch it Done
Click here to see a video of a cat having a suitable blood sample drawn (provided by Dr.
Margie Wilson).
Most glucometers come in a kit that includes instruction discs, the meter, a control solution
or similar calibration method, lancets to take your pet’s blood, and glucose sticks for the
meter to read. In short, one assembles a dipstick in the meter and turns it on, punctures

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 2/6
the pet’s ear or other area, and puts the stick in contact with the drop of blood that wells
up. The meter does the rest.
Performing a Glucose Curve at Home
Be sure to check glucose before feeding and before insulin is given. This is
probably the most important glucose reading of the curve.
Note the time of each glucose level, note the time of each feeding and the time
the insulin is given.
Check blood glucose levels every 2 hours until it is time for the next insulin
level.
At the end of the curve, provide the information to your veterinarian so that
insulin dosing adjustments can be made.
Advantages of this Method:
An implanted device that lasts only 2 weeks is not needed. You can pick up
your meter and lancets any time and get your pet's glucose level. You can do
spot checks or you can obtain full curves.
Disadvantages of this Method:
You have to take your pet's blood in order to get a reading. This is not always
simple.
You will need to replenish your supply of test strips periodically.
The meter will require some period maintenance and calibration which you will
need to do.
You will need to keep your own record of glucose levels. Here are some helpful
resources on that:
A printable Monitoring Diary visit (PDF format) is available for download, here.
Urine Monitoring for Ketones
What are Ketones?
Everyone knows that food provides our bodies with fuel. Most of our tissues can burn
stored fat, though our brains (and a few other tissues) have no use for fat and must burn
glucose. In normal life, there is plenty of glucose to feed our brains and plenty of fat to
feed the rest of our bodies and our metabolism runs happily along but in times of
starvation problems start: we deplete stored glucose and we burn fat rapidly and
desperately.
Ketones are a by-product of intense fat burning. The brain is able to use ketones as an
alternative to glucose which is a good thing. The problem is that intense ketone production
leads to metabolic pH changes leading to acidic blood and dangerous electrolyte
imbalances.
When diabetes mellitus is complicated by infection or other problems, ketoacidosis can
result. This is a very serious complication that can lead to expensive hospitalization and
even death. It is helpful to monitor your pet’s urine for the presence of ketones.
Urine Ketone Monitoring
Ketostix are urine dipsticks that indicate the presence of ketones in urine. Only a drop of
urine is needed. Dip the ketostick in the urine and look for a color change. A color guide is
present on the bottle of dipsticks. This need not be done every day if the pet seems to be
doing well but when it is done record the results in the monitoring notebook if you have
one.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Ketostix can be purchased at any drugstore. Photo courtesy
of MarVista Vet
"Grabber-reacher" tool.
Photo courtesy of MarVista
Vet
Urine dipsticks to detect ketones are
available at most drug stores and can be
used for home monitoring. The presence
of ketones in urine for three days or more
in a row warrants a visit to the veterinarian.
Occasional ketones are not an alarming
finding in a diabetic pet but if ketones are
found in urine three days in a row or if the
patient showing ketones seems ill (poor
appetite, vomiting, etc.) then the pet should
see the vet right away. In such a situation,
diabetic ketoacidosis is likely occurring and
serious treatment is likely needed.
Collecting Your Pet's Urine
Using Ketostix is simple enough, but one
will need a sample of the pet’s urine. For
dogs, this is best done as a two-person job.
Male Dogs
A male dog’s urine can be collected on a walk using a cup. The
male dog is walked and when he lifts his leg to urinate, the second
person simply catches the urine in the cup. This can be done with
one person with some practice. It may be helpful to bend a metal
coat hanger so that it can hold a paper cup on one end and have
a long handle on the other end or invest in a “grabber reacher” as
shown below to hold the cup. Alternatively, urine collection
devices (basically a large spoon on an extendable handle) are
available.
Female Dogs
A female dog is a bit trickier, and one may need a second person
to slip a small paper plate under the dog as she urinates. Again, it
is helpful if a second person manipulates the plate and uses the ketostick so that the
person holding the leash does not have to manage all these tasks at once. If only one
person is available, the “grabber reacher” shown above or a urine collection device may
be helpful.
Cats
For cats, a piece of cellophane can be placed over the litter box and some urine will be
caught there even if the cat digs in the box. Only a drop of urine is needed for the test so
even if the cellophane is wrinkled up hopefully a drop can still be obtained. Alternatively, a
very small amount of litter can be placed in the box. The cat will still understand what he
or she is supposed to do but not all the urine will be absorbed by the litter.
It is not necessary or particularly even desirable to monitor urine glucose with
dipsticks. The contents of the urinary bladder represent several hours of urine
production, thus making the interpretation of urine glucose challenging. In the
past, urine glucose monitoring has been recommended and certainly, there is
nothing wrong with collecting more information. However, it can be confusing
to decipher and should be considered optional.
Monitoring at the Hospital

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 4/6
Now that we've covered home monitoring, it is important to realize that some tests will
simply be needed at the vet's office. Your vet will need to check in on how your pet is
doing. Weight will be checked. The state of oral health will be reviewed as diabetic pets
especially need clean teeth to minimize the seeding of other organs with bacteria.
Expect the following tests:
A basic blood panel to see how other organs are doing.
A urinalysis and culture as diabetic pets are highly prone to urinary tract
infections.
A fructosamine level that checks the average blood sugar levels over the last 2
weeks.
A glucose curve if one cannot be provided from home.
Urinalysis and Urine Culture
It is largely inevitable that sugar will spill into your pet’s urine possibly even for a short
time daily. Sugar in urine is highly encouraging to bacteria and urinary tract infections are
common in diabetic pets. Often symptoms are difficult to discern at home so periodically
performing urine cultures is a good practice in ruling out latent infection.
Learn more about urinary tract infections here.
Fructosamine Level
Measuring fructosamine is a helpful way to help monitor glucose control and, if for
whatever reason, it is not possible to run glucose curves this would be the next best thing.
Blood glucose fluctuations leave a metabolic mark that lasts a week or two. Measuring
fructosamine gives a sense of the average blood glucose over the previous couple of
weeks. Control is designated “excellent,” “good,” “fair,” “poor,” or “prolonged
hypoglycemia.” Of course, because the fructosamine is looking at averages, it will not
distinguish excellent control from wide swings from very high to very low glucose
readings. Still, even with this limitation, fructosamine is good to include in periodic
monitoring tests.
The Glucose Curve in the Animal Hospital
If your pet is not amenable to the Freestyle Libre device and not amenable to having
blood sampling at home, a curve will likely be needed in the hospital. The curve is needed
whenever there is a change in insulin dose or a change in your pet's status. This will be an
all-day stay for your pet.
Find out if you are to feed your pet first at home first. Some pets do not eat
normally in the hospital which can alter the curve, but some veterinarians prefer
you to bring the food with you and leave it with the pet. Definitely bring the pet's
insulin and syringes as you will probably need to demonstrate your insulin
administration technique.
The veterinary staff will run a pre-insulin glucose level.
After this is drawn, they will observe how you draw up and administer the
insulin confirming that you are doing it correctly.
The pet is then left with the food for the day and the veterinary staff will check
blood glucose levels every 2 hours.
Pick up your pet and receive new dosing instructions at the end of the day.
Remember, the numbers are not as important as how your pet is doing. We want your pet
to lead as happy a life as possible free from excessive thirst, excessive hunger, secondary
diseases, etc. Diabetes mellitus will require some home participation and good
communication with your veterinarian in order for regulation to be achieved.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 5/6
Related resources
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir (Levemir) Insulin - November 14, 2023
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952916&pid=19239
c66728e6-9a6c-4ebf-a5d2-6e80c74f5f3f.1754158509
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4952916&ind=239&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Treatment of Pituitary Form of
Cushing's Syndrome
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 06, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
Cushing's syndrome
(hyperadrenocorticism) is a chronically
debilitating hormone imbalance that can
affect many species, humans included;
we will be limiting our discussion to dogs
and cats, however. Cushing's syndrome,
also called Cushing's disease, results
from excessive cortisol in the bloodstream
and the symptoms all stem from long-term
over-exposure to this hormone.
Dogs
There are many clinical signs associated
with Cushing’s syndrome (also called
hyperadrenocorticism) in dogs. These
signs usually come on gradually and,
because of this slow onset, these
changes are often written off as part of
the normal aging process. The following
list of common symptoms that an owner
might observe in their pet at home is:
Drinking excessively
Urinating excessively
Incontinence 
Owners often notice that lately the water bowl must be
filled more frequently than in the past. Some dogs are
unable to hold their bladder all night and begin crying to
go outside during the night when previously this was
unnecessary.
Also, urinary tract infections may be detected and true
urine leaking may be observed.
How Much Water Consumption is Normal? Each day a dog should drink about one cup of
water for each ten pounds of body weight, though this can vary somewhat with
environmental temperature and activity level. Dogs that truly have excessive water
consumption will consume vastly more than this regularly.
Increased or even Ravenous Appetite

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951510&ind=240&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
Illustration by Wendy
Brooks, DVM
Illustration by Wendy Brooks,
DVM
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
This symptom often leads dogs to beg incessantly or
steal food from the garbage. It is important for an owner
not to be fooled by the pet’s apparent good appetite:
eating well is not necessarily a sign of normal health.
Pot-bellied Appearance
This symptom, present in over 90% of Cushing’s
syndrome dogs, results from hormonal redistribution of
body fat plus a breakdown of abdominal musculature.
Further contributing to the pot belly is an enlarged liver which may
bulge a bit especially with weakened abdominal muscles.
Muscle Weakness
Muscle protein is broken down in Cushing’s syndrome. The result
may be seen as exercise intolerance, lethargy, reluctance to jump
up on furniture or climb stairs.
Skin Disease
The classical signs of endocrine (hormonal) skin diseases are:
1. Hair loss on the main body sparing the head and legs.
2. Thin, wrinkled skin with poor wound healing.
3. Hair that does not grow back after clipping.
4. Blackheads and darkening of the skin, especially on
the abdomen.
5. Persistent or recurring skin infections (especially if the
dog is not itchy during times when the skin infection is cleared).
Another condition of the skin that may be observed is called calcinosis cutis, in which
calcium deposits occur within the skin. These are raised, hard, almost rock-like areas that
can occur almost anywhere on the body.
Some other notable findings might include: excessive panting and shortness of
breath, urinary protein loss, infertility, extreme muscle stiffness (called
pseudomyotonia - a very, very rare symptom in Cushing’s disease), and high
blood pressure.
Aside from the symptoms described above, advanced untreated Cushing's disease puts a
dog at risk for the following serious problems: calcium oxalate bladder stones, diabetes
mellitus, and pulmonary thromboembolism.
Cats
In cats, the clinical features of Cushing’s disease are similar
to those in dogs: excess water consumption, muscle
wasting, pot-bellied appearance, and thin coat. Cats also
can develop a thinning and weakening of the skin to the
point of spontaneous tearing or a peculiar curling-in of their
ear tips, neither of which is seen in dogs.
An important difference to note is that while only 10 percent
of dogs with Cushing’s disease develop diabetes mellitus, 80
percent of cats with it develop diabetes mellitus. Dogs with
Cushing's disease drink excessively because their Cushing's
disease makes them do so. Cats with Cushing's disease
drink excessively because they are diabetic and their
diabetes makes them do so. In fact, most cats are diagnosed with Cushing's disease

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951510&ind=240&objTypeID=1007 2/3
AFTER their diabetes mellitus has been diagnosed, failed to be regulated and a second
disease is being sought to explain poor diabetes control. The 20 percent of cats with
Cushing's disease that are not diabetic do not drink excessively.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - October 25, 2022
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951510&pid=19239
c66728e6-9a6c-4ebf-a5d2-6e80c74f5f3f.1754158533
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951510&ind=240&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Additional Resources
Quality of Life Survey for Dog Owners
With and Without Cushing's disease
-------------------------------------------------------------
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Description
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's
Syndrome
Laboratory Tests Confirming
Cushing's Syndrome
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the
Type
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's
Syndrome
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's
Syndrome
Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 25, 2022
Published: January 01, 2001
Pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome
does not always require treatment. The
ultimate goal of therapy is to improve the
patient's life quality and to fortify the
patient's bond with his owner, so if the
Cushing's patient is not having problems
with symptoms, treatment may not be
indicated. In deciding whether or not to
treat Cushing's syndrome, consider
symptoms that this particular individual
patient is dealing with. For example, if the
patient is drinking excessively but is not
urinating in the house, this may not be a
problem. If the patient has recurrent
bladder or skin infections, high blood
pressure, urinary protein loss, or is so
hungry as to be raiding the kitchen
regularly, then treatment is needed.
The treatment of pituitary dependent
Cushing's disease has been dominated
by two medications: Lysodren® (also
called Mitotane or o,p’-DDD),
and Trilostane (brand name Vetoryl®). These medications are associated with different
side effects potential and expense and any of them can be expected to produce good
results in a confirmed case of pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome. That said,
Trilostane has largely captured the market at this point so we will begin with it. Two other
medications: ketoconazole and selegiline are also sometimes used but with less reliable
results but they may be applicable in specific circumstances. We will review these as well.
Trilostane
Trilostane is an inhibitor of an enzyme called 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase. This
enzyme is involved in the production of several steroids, including cortisol. Inhibiting this
enzyme inhibits the production of cortisol.
While trilostane is substantially newer to the market than Lysodren®, the traditional
treatment, several studies have determined trilostane to be as effective as Lysodren® in
treating Cushing's syndrome. Furthermore, trilostane is approved to treat pituitary
dependent Cushing's disease (and Lysodren® is not) and there is belief that trilostane has
less potential for side effects. For these reasons, trilostane has emerged as the most
common treatment for pituitary dependent Cushing's disease.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Trilostane is given once or twice a day with food (as opposed to Lysodren, which is given
twice a week). Common side effects are mild lethargy and appetite reduction especially
when medication is started and the body adapts to its hormonal changes. More
serious Addisonian reactions (see below) have been reported where the adrenal cortex
actually dies off and the patient is left with a cortisol deficiency. Most trilostane reactions
are minor and can be reversed by discontinuing the trilostane; however, permanent
Addisonian reactions, where cortisol suppression is too strong (see below), are possible
just as with Lysodren® with an important difference. With Lysodren® reactions depend on
the amount being given (higher dose = more chance of reaction) but with trilostane
reactions are random and unpredictable (idiosyncratic).
The doses of both Lysodren® and trilostane are adjusted based on results of periodic blood
tests (ACTH stimulation tests) typically done at 14 days, 30 days, 90 days and then every 4-
6 months depending on results. You might ask why you might consider trilostane given
that its monitoring is similar to that of Lysodren while its dosing schedule is less
convenient. The answer seems to be that the side effects potential is milder and one is
less likely to get into a serious position with trilostane compared to Lysodren®. Trilostane
also comes in a formula (a capsule) that is approved for veterinary use, making it more
readily available than Lysodren®, which is a human medication and frequently a special
order at most human pharmacies. These factors have led to trilostane predominating in
the treatment of canine Cushing's disease. Many veterinarians consider trilostane to be
their first choice in Cushing's disease treatment.
Lysodren: The Traditional Therapy
For decades, Lysodren® was the only treatment for pituitary dependent Cushing's
disease. It is convenient to use and relatively inexpensive, though it does have the
potential for serious side effects. One of the disadvantages of Lysodren therapy is the
need for regular monitoring blood tests. Too much Lysodren is toxic and too little is not
going to control the Cushing's symptoms. Because of the potential for dose-dependent
side effects, monitoring tests are especially important from a safety standpoint.
How this Medication Works
Lysodren should be considered to be a chemotherapy drug. It actually erodes the layers of
the adrenal gland that produce corticosteroid hormones. The pituitary tumor continues to
secrete excess stimulation but the adrenal gland is no longer capable of responding with
excess hormone production because there isn't enough cortex to make excessive
hormone amounts. Instead, if everything has gone according to plan, the adrenal cortex
will have been eroded away so as to yield normal - rather than excessive - cortisol
production. Over several months all the symptoms of Cushing's syndrome resolve and the
patient feels active and happy.
Problems result when too much of the adrenal cortex is eroded. Short-term Lysodren
reactions are common (something like 30% of dogs will have one at some point),
necessitating the use of a prednisone antidote pill that the veterinarian supplies. In event
of such short term reactions, Lysodren® is discontinued until the adrenal gland can regrow to the desired thickness and therapy is resumed, possibly at a lower dose.
Sometimes excess adrenal erosion is permanent and the dog must be treated for
cortisone deficiency. This is more serious and the potential for this kind of reaction has
been the driving force behind the search for better medications to treat pituitary dependent
Cushing's disease (though it is worth noting that in Europe it is common to purposely
create a cortisol deficiency; see the section below on Addison's Disease.)
How this Medication is Used
There are two phases to the treatment of Cushing's disease with Lysodren: an induction

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 2/6
phase to gain control of the disease and a lower dose maintenance phase that ideally
lasts for the animal's entire life.
Induction
During induction, the pet owner receives a prescription for lysodren (usually obtained
through a local human pharmacy). Your veterinarian may also send a bottle of prednisone
tablets to be used as an antidote should any lysodren reactions erupt. Be sure you
understand which pill is which. Lysodren is given twice a day with meals during this period
so that the plump, excessively stimulated adrenal gland can be rapidly shaved down to
the desired size. It is important that lysodren be given with food or it will not be absorbed
into your dog's body. A test called an ACTH stimulation test (the same test which may
have been used to diagnose Cushing's disease originally) is used to confirm that the
induction endpoint has been reached.
An approach gaining popularity involves reducing the dog's food intake by 30% the day
before induction begins to ensure the dog is very hungry for induction. The food is
restricted in this way throughout the induction period. The endpoint of induction is
determined by a subtle reduction in the patient's appetite (looking up half way through
eating the bowl of food, not running to the bowl as quickly as usual, not finishing the meal
etc.) Should any of these signs be observed, this would indicate that the endpoint of
induction has been reached and it is time for the ACTH stimulation test. Induction
proceeds until endpoint has been reached but if 8 to 9 days have passed and a clear
endpoint has not been observed, the dog should have the ACTH stimulation test at that
time anyway
Note: Lysodren therapy should never be used in a dog who does not have a good
appetite. A Cushing's dog who does not have a good appetite has an additional
problem that must be diagnosed before pursuing therapy for Cushing's
syndrome.
You should call your veterinarian if any of the following signs of induction endpoint are
observed:
Diarrhea or vomiting
Appetite loss (this may be as subtle as less enthusiasm towards eating when
the food is served, not running for the bowl etc.)
Decrease in water consumption (it may be helpful for you to measure water
consumption during the induction period)
Lethargy or listlessness
If any of these signs occur, let your veterinarian know. It may be time for an early ACTH
stimulation test or possibly even for an antidote pill. It is a good idea to maintain daily
telephone contact with your vet after the third day or so of induction as it is at this point
that a dog becomes at risk for reaching an early induction endpoint.
If none of the above signs are noted, then the ACTH Stimulation test proceeds as
scheduled on the 8 or 9 day of induction. If this test indicates that sufficient adrenal
erosion has taken place, then the Lysodren dose is given once or twice a week instead of
twice a day and the dog has successfully entered maintenance. If the test indicates that
more adrenal erosion is needed, induction continues. Most dogs are ready for
maintenance within the first week of induction but others require more time, especially if
they are taking other drugs that alter the metabolism of Lysodren. (Phenobarbital would be
the obvious such medication.)
Maintenance
After achieving maintenance, another ACTH stimulation test is recommended after about
th th

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 3/6
a month and then twice a year or so thereafter. Approximately 50% of dogs will experience
a relapse at some point and require a second round of induction.
Full reversal of clinical signs associated with Cushing's disease can be
expected after 4 to 6 months of Lysodren therapy. Usually the first sign to show
improvement is the excess water consumption. The last sign to show change
will be hair re-growth.
If appetite loss, vomiting, diarrhea or listlessness occur at any time during
maintenance, a Lysodren reaction should be suspected. The veterinarian
should be notified; it may be time for one of the prednisone antidote pills. A
Lysodren reaction generally reverses within 30 minutes on an antidote pill.
What is Addison's Disease/Addisonian Crisis?
Addison's disease, also called hypoadrenocorticism, is the opposite of Cushing's disease;
Addison's disease results from a deficiency of cortisone. If Lysodren® erodes away too
much of the adrenal gland or if there is an idiosyncratic trilostane response, an Addisonian
reaction occurs that can be temporary or permanent. The symptoms mentioned above
(vomiting, diarrhea, listlessness, appetite loss) may be seen and if symptoms are ignored,
the patient can go into shock and die. If you suspect an Addisonian reaction is occurring,
a dose of prednisone (which has hopefully been provided to keep on hand in case of
emergency) should reverse the reaction within 30 minutes, or a couple of hours at most. If
no response to prednisone is seen, the dog has some other illness. If the dog is back to
normal after the prednisone dose, then contact the veterinarian for further instructions.
The prednisone will likely have to be continued for a couple of weeks.
Addison's disease can be permanent after a drug reaction. If this occurs, hormone
supplementation becomes needed indefinitely to prevent life-threatening shock as the
body becomes unable to adapt to any sort of stress on its own. Medications to treat
Addison's disease can be expensive, especially for larger dogs, and it is generally felt that
creating Addison’s disease is undesirable. That said, in Europe it is common to treat
Cushing's disease by purposely creating an Addisonian state because it is much simpler
to treat Addison's disease than it is to treat Cushing's. The technique for purposely
creating Addison's disease is called medical adrenalectomy. It involves very high doses of
Lysodren and is done in a controlled manner. It is not a common procedure in the U.S.
See more information on Addison's disease, which can also be seen in animals and
people as a natural occurrence with no help from Lysodren.
Advantages of Trilostane over Lysodren
Trilostane acts as an enzyme inhibitor and the
inhibition it causes is fully reversible. It is unclear
why Addisonian reaction is still possible with this
medication. Though not completely free of side
effects potential, it is generally felt to be safer.
Disadvantages of Trilostane Compared to Lysodren
Trilostane is given once or twice daily while
Lysodren is given only once or twice a
week. More frequent dosing translates to
higher expense and less convenience.
Because initial references to trilostane suggested it was safer than Lysodren, it
is possible for a pet owner to have a false sense of security and ignore

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 4/6
important signs of drug reaction.
Some dogs do better with once daily administration, and for other dogs the
medication simply does not last long enough to allow for once daily dosing.
Monitoring tests will help determine what regimen is best for a given patient.
Timing of the monitoring blood tests relative to the administration of the
medication is much stricter with trilostane than with Lysodren.
Ketoconazole and Selegiline: Rarely Used Alternatives Nowadays
At this time, meaningful treatment with medication involves a choice between trilostane
and Lysodren but in the years before trilostane was available in the U.S., alternatives for
dogs intolerant of Lysodren were in great demand. Ketoconazole, an antifungal
medication, was found to have steroid-suppressing side effects that could be exploited to
treat Cushing's syndrome. Unlike the other drugs, ketoconazole did not pose a risk for
Addisonian reaction. Unfortunately, sustained responses were hard to come by and since
more effective alternatives have emerged, ketoconazole is now relegated to its original
function: treating fungal disease.
Selegiline (also called L-Deprenyl or Anipryl) acts by increasing dopamine and
consequently reducing ACTH production. The problem is that this type of ACTH regulation
does not work well when a pituitary tumor is involved as tumors tend not to respond to
regulation like normal tissues do. Selegiline breaks down into amphetamines (strong
stimulants) that may be therapeutic in other ways for Cushing's patients. Side effects are
minimal, though there is some expense compared to the other Cushing's medications.
The potential for the induction of Addison's disease as well as the need for periodic
expensive monitoring tests have provided impetus for the development of a Lysodren
alternative. Ketoconazole was actually developed for a totally different purpose.
A Note on Surgery
Since pituitary-dependent Cushing's syndrome is caused by a pituitary tumor, the question
arises about removing the tumor surgically. This treatment has received more attention
recently but the location of the pituitary (at the base of the brain) makes surgery
problematic. Surgery is not at this time a common treatment in the U.S. and special
facilities are required for this surgery. Unless you live in a unique community where there
is a surgeon with extensive experience in this as yet esoteric procedure, I recommend
sticking with the medical therapies.
Summary
Choosing a therapy for pituitary Cushing's syndrome should take into account
effectiveness, cost, monitoring schedule, dosing schedule, and side effects potential. In
the future, surgical options are likely to come forward as they have for human Cushing's
syndrome. Direct further concerns and questions to your veterinarian while you select an
option.
Related resources
Laboratory Tests Confirming Cushing's Syndrome - November 13, 2024
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome - November 6, 2024
Cushing's Syndrome: Classifying the Type - January 24, 2024
Laboratory Tests Hinting at Cushing's Syndrome - October 7, 2023

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 5/6
Pituitary Macroadenoma in Cushing's Syndrome - October 5, 2023
Adrenal Tumor Treatment in Cushing's Syndrome - August 24, 2023
Cushing's Syndrome (Hyperadrenocorticism): Description - September 19, 2017
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951512&pid=19239
c66728e6-9a6c-4ebf-a5d2-6e80c74f5f3f.1754158554
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/2/25, 11:45 PM Treatment of Pituitary Form of Cushing's Syndrome - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254094&id=4951512&ind=241&objTypeID=1007 6/6






