Common Household Items Can Poison Pets
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Revised: October 03, 2018
Published: March 19, 2002
The ASPCA's Animal Poison Control lists these products as the most common ones that
can poison pets. These are not the only ones, just the most common ones.
Household Products
Bleach
Carpet fresheners
Carpet Shampoo
Essential oils
Fabric softener sheets
Grout
Toilet cleaning tablets
Vinegar and water
Medications and Cosmetics
Adderall
Petroleum jelly
Aspirin, baby aspirin
Bar soap and face wash
Breath fresheners (Xylitol)
Cigarettes and nicotine patches
Ibuprofen and naproxen
Kaopectate and Pepto Bismol
Mosquito repellent with DEET
Pseudoephedrine (and other nasal decongestants)
Sorbitol
Topical creams/ointments (read labels for ingredients)
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6047985&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289341

8/4/25, 12:05 PM Common Household Items Can Poison Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=6047985&ind=575&objTypeID=1007 1/2
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:05 PM Common Household Items Can Poison Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=6047985&ind=575&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of
Antifreeze and Your Pets
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Revised: June 27, 2018
Published: January 01, 2001
Chances are, you’re already aware of the fact that antifreeze can be a dangerous poison
to humans and animals alike. But do you know why the substance is so toxic to pets?
Would you know what to do if your pet got into the chemical?
Since the winter weather has many people reaching for the antifreeze, the ASPCA Animal
Poison Control Center (APCC) wants to make sure you know exactly why it’s so important
to keep your pets safe from this toxin, what to do if you think they have been exposed,
and what can be done to help your pet in the event of an emergency.
What Makes Antifreeze a Dangerous Chemical?
A key ingredient found in most antifreeze is ethylene glycol. Ethylene glycol is highly toxic
and affects the nervous system and kidneys. What’s worse is that ethylene glycol has a
sweet taste, so pets can easily be drawn to and ingest it. It takes only a small amount of
ethylene glycol to be potentially fatal. While problems may start within a couple of hours
of ingestion, sometimes early signs may be missed in poisoning cases concerning this
ingredient. In six to twelve hours, pets may be markedly ill.
Where is Ethylene Glycol Found?
While ethylene glycol is most commonly found in antifreeze used in car radiators, that is
not the only location it can be found. Antifreeze may also be found in:
The base of portable basketball hoops
Placed in toilets to ‘winterize’ a house and keep plumbing from freezing
Printer and pen inks
Eye masks
Snow globes
Some household latex paints
Signs of Ethylene Glycol/Antifreeze Poisoning
Unsteadiness on the feet
Vomiting
Depression
Increase in thirst and urination
Loss of appetite
Seizures
What Should you Do if your Pet has Ingested Antifreeze?
If you think your pet may have ingested antifreeze, the best thing to do is immediately take
them to the veterinary hospital. You’ll also want to be sure to bring with you the packaging
from the antifreeze, so the veterinarian can determine the best form of treatment based on

8/4/25, 12:06 PM Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of Antifreeze and Your Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=6047934&ind=576&objTypeID=1007 1/2
the amount ingested and the ingredients listed in the product.
At the hospital, the veterinarian will evaluate your pet and run lab tests. If it is uncertain
whether your pet was exposed to antifreeze or exposed to enough to be cause for
concern, there is a test the veterinarians can run to first determine if the exposure will be
harmful or problematic.
The good news is, if your pet has ingested antifreeze, there is an antidote. However, it
is extremely important to get treatment started as soon as possible.
What Else Do you Need to Know?
Pet-safe antifreezes do exist. Instead of containing ethylene glycol, these versions of
antifreeze contain propylene glycol—which has a much wider margin of safety. It is still
best practice to keep pets out of any type of chemicals, even pet-safe antifreeze.
If you suspect your pet has been exposed to any poisonous substances, contact your
veterinarian or call Animal Poison Control Center (APCC) at 888-426-4435 immediately.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6047934&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289388
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:06 PM Digging Deeper: Getting the Facts on the Dangers of Antifreeze and Your Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=6047934&ind=576&objTypeID=1007 2/2
This hardened mass of expanded
Gorilla Glue was removed from a dog.
Photo courtesy of Dr. Tony Johnson.
The mass was positioned next to a
cupcake to indicate its size. Photo by
Dr. Tony Johnson.
Stomach cast surgically removed from
the stomach of a dog who ingested
Gorilla Glue. The glue expands quickly
once it comes in contact with gastric
liquids, resulting in a foreign body in the
stomach.
Abdominal radiograph using barium shows
the outline of the large stomach foreign
body caused by ingestion of Gorilla Glue.
This dog passed a few pieces of glue in
stool after surgery.
Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause
Obstructions in Pets
Linda Shell, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Revised: July 17, 2020
Published: January 30, 2012
If swallowed in liquid form, some polyurethane-based glue products can create a lifethreatening stomach blockage because they expand and harden once in the stomach.
Glues that contain diphenylmethane diisocyanate (MDI),
(e.g. Gorilla Glue™ and Elmer’s Glue-All Max®) are designed to foam and expand after
exposure to moisture. These types of glue are most typically used by woodworkers.
Unfortunately, if a pet swallows glue with MDI in it, the warm and moist environment of the
stomach causes the glue to foam and expand into a large mass. The glue is thought to
harden within a few minutes after ingestion, effectively becoming a foreign body and
blocking the entry of food either in or out of the stomach. When a large amount is
ingested, it hardens in the shape of the stomach. The hardened material usually can't be
vomited up because it's too big to go through the esophagus.

8/4/25, 12:06 PM Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause Obstructions in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=5276353&ind=577&objTypeID=1007 1/2
While other animals have been known to eat these glues, the typical patient is a dog.
Even if you see your pet swallow the glue, do not force him to vomit because this could
cause the expanding glue to get stuck in the esophagus or be inhaled into the lungs.
Surgically speaking, it is more difficult to remove the glue from the esophagus than from
the stomach.
Signs that a pet has eaten this glue can be seen anywhere from 15 minutes to 20 hours
after ingestion. These signs include vomiting (sometimes it is bloody), an enlarged
stomach, stomach pain, lack of appetite, and lethargy. X-rays of the abdomen are typically
necessary to arrive at a diagnosis. Surgery is the only possible treatment as the foam is
not digestible. Surgery is usually done on an emergency basis since stomach ulceration
and rupture can occur if the glue is not removed from the stomach in a timely manner.
Ingesting a few drops of these glues may not be a problem and would likely just cause
mild gastrointestinal distress. If you don’t know how much your pet ingested, then it is
wise to consult with your veterinarian, who may recommend taking X-rays.
Because MDI isn’t always listed on the product label, consider any expanding adhesive as
potentially containing it. To prevent your pets from ingesting these glues or any potentially
harmful substance, store them properly and securely where there is no chance your pets
could get them.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5276353&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289407
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:06 PM Expandable Foaming Glues like Gorilla Glue Cause Obstructions in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=5276353&ind=577&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: February 20, 2020
Published: March 27, 2004
The most common cause of lead poisoning in pets is ingestion of lead-based paint.
Although lead-based paint is no longer available in the United States, it was used in
buildings for many years. When these buildings are renovated or become weathered, the
lead-based paint can contaminate the soil. Pets digging in the soil can become exposed to
the lead paint, and then self-grooming or other methods of ingestion can occur.
Lead can also be obtained via other sources: toys, fishing tackle, drapery weights, solder,
gasoline exhaust, car batteries, plumbing materials and supplies, lubricating compounds,
putty or tar paper, lead foil, golf balls, food packaging, and improperly glazed ceramic food
or water bowls. Water is rarely an important source of lead poisoning.
Puppies and younger dogs are more likely to chew on foreign objects, so they tend to be
affected more often than older dogs. Cats rarely chew on such items, so they are more
likely to get lead poisoning from self-grooming. Lead affects the stability of the red blood
cell (RBC) membrane. Young animals have a greater susceptibility to lead because of an
increased blood-brain barrier permeability to lead, as well as greater absorption rates.
Signs of lead poisoning in dogs include behavior changes (lethargy, aggression, constant
snapping, seizures, hysteria, hiding in dark areas, and depression), frothing at the mouth,
anorexia (lack of appetite), weight loss, vomiting, and diarrhea. Signs in cats include
anorexia (loss of appetite), vomiting, diarrhea, and seizures. The toxic dose of lead in pets
is 10 to 15 mg/kg when given as a single dose. However, signs of poisoning can occur
from low-level chronic poisoning (5 mg/kg body weight per day).
Diagnostic tests include urine testing, complete blood count (CBC), and blood chemistry.
Radiographs may be required to determine if there is a lead object in the gastrointestinal
tract.
Treatment includes removal of the lead source (endoscopy, surgery), decontamination
(gastric lavage, enemas, activated charcoal, cathartics), and chelation therapy. (Lead
binds to the chelating agents; this allows the lead to be excreted from the body.)
The prognosis depends on the severity of the signs and the length of time the signs were
present. Most animals do not have residual neurological signs after recovery.
If lead intoxication is diagnosed in a pet, the owner should be warned of the possibility of
human exposure to environmental lead.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.

8/4/25, 12:07 PM Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952047&ind=578&objTypeID=1007 1/2
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952047&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289428
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:07 PM Lead Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952047&ind=578&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Pet Poison Prevention
Published: February 13, 2025
Shannon Emmons, DVM
Protecting Your Pets from Poisonous Hazards
Pets are naturally curious, which can sometimes get
them into trouble. One of the most common
emergencies veterinarians see is toxin exposure. Pets
can accidentally ingest or come in contact with harmful
substances, leading to serious health risks. Treatment
depends on the toxin and may range from a simple
outpatient visit to extended hospitalization. Knowing
about common toxins and taking steps to prevent
exposure can help keep your pets safe and healthy.
Common Toxins That Threaten Pets
Each year, the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center identifies the top toxins that harm pets.
The list includes many everyday items. Over-the-counter medications, like ibuprofen,
acetaminophen, and vitamins, are the most common culprits. Human foods, such as grapes,
coffee, alcohol, and sugar-free gum containing xylitol, pose a serious threat to pets.
Prescription medications, chocolate, and flavored veterinary products, such as chewable
medications, are also dangerous when ingested.
2024 ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center’s List of Common Toxins:
Rank Category Examples Details
     1 Over-the-Counter Medications
Ibuprofen, acetaminophen, cold
medications, vitamins
Harmful even in small amounts
common in many households
     2 Human Foods and Drinks
Grapes, raisins, coffee, alcohol, xylitol
(in sugar-free gum)
Can cause severe health
problems like kidney failure,
seizures, or toxicity
     3 Human Prescription Medications
Heart medications, inhalers, ADHD
medications
Serious risks if ingested,
including heart or respiratory
complications

8/4/25, 12:08 PM Pet Poison Prevention - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12509433&ind=579&objTypeID=10 1/4
     4 Chocolate All types, especially dark chocolate
Contains theobromine, which is
toxic to pets; darker varieties a
more dangerous
     5 Veterinary Products Flavored chewable medications
Overdoses can occur if pets
consume too many due to their
appealing taste
     6 Plants and Fungi
Lilies (especially for cats), toxic
mushrooms
Can cause organ failure or
severe reactions; lilies are
particularly deadly for cats
     7 Household Products Batteries, preservative packets,
cleaning supplies
Dangerous if chewed or
swallowed; can cause
burns, poisoning, or
choking
     8 Rodenticides Rat and mouse poisons
Extremely toxic, even in
small amounts, and can be
fatal without immediate
treatment
     9 Insecticides Improperly stored or used
pesticides
Can cause poisoning if
ingested or inhaled; harm
if applied directly to pets.
    10 Recreational Drugs Marijuana (including edibles),
psychedelic mushrooms
Increasingly common; can
cause vomiting, lethargy,
tremors, or severe
neurological symptoms
Plants and fungi, including lilies and toxic mushrooms, are frequent dangers, as are
household items such as batteries and preservative packets. Rodenticides and insecticides
can cause severe poisoning if eaten, and recreational drugs, such as marijuana and

8/4/25, 12:08 PM Pet Poison Prevention - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12509433&ind=579&objTypeID=10 2/4
Basket muzzle
psychedelic mushrooms, are increasingly involved in poisoning cases.
Steps to Take if Your Pet Encounters a Toxin
If you suspect your pet has been exposed to a toxin, immediate action can save their life.
Start by calling your veterinarian or the closest emergency animal hospital. They may direct
you to a pet poison hotline for specialized advice.
In some cases, your veterinarian may recommend making your pet vomit to remove the
toxin, but this should only be done under their guidance. If the toxin is on your pet’s fur or
skin, wash it off with mild soap and water as soon as possible. Follow your veterinarian’s
recommendations and take your pet in for treatment if necessary. Prompt care can make all
the difference.
Making Your Home Safer for Your Pets
Preventing poison exposure begins with proactive
measures. Store medications, cleaning products, and
dangerous foods in secure cabinets or areas your pet
cannot access. Be extra vigilant during busy times, such
as holidays, when it is harder to monitor your pet and their
surroundings.
Block access to high-risk areas, such as kitchens and
dining rooms, with barriers such as baby gates. If your pet
tends to scavenge during walks, consider training them to
wear a basket muzzle to prevent them from picking up or
eating dangerous items.
Teach your pet cues such as “drop it” or “trade up” to
encourage them to release objects willingly in exchange
for a reward, making the process positive and conflictfree.
Pattern Games help build engagement, making it easier for
your pet to focus on you in urgent situations, such as
when a harmful item is nearby. Consistently practicing
these techniques improves your pet’s reliability and keeps
them safe from potential hazards.
Toxin exposure is a frightening experience for any caregiver, but taking proactive steps can
significantly reduce the risks. By creating a safe environment, teaching reliable cues, and
preparing for emergencies, you can protect your pet in unexpected and dangerous
situations.
Pet Poison Hotlines (There may be a fee):
ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center (888) 426-4435
Pet Poison Helpline (855) 764-7661
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=12509433&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289449
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/4/25, 12:08 PM Pet Poison Prevention - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12509433&ind=579&objTypeID=10 3/4
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:08 PM Pet Poison Prevention - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12509433&ind=579&objTypeID=10 4/4

Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Roger Gfeller, DVM, DACVECC; Michael Thomas, DVM; Isaac Mayo; The VIN Emergency Medicine
Consultants
Revised: April 01, 2020
Published: December 31, 1994
Poisoning is a condition that results from the ingestion, inhalation, absorption, injection, or
application of a substance that causes structural damage or functional disturbance of
body tissues. The poison can be a plant, a medication given in excess, a cleaning
product, or other household chemicals.
What to Do
Call a veterinarian or a poison control center, and follow their instructions. If you
do not have a local poison control center, you can call the ASPCA's Animal
Poison Control Center at (888) 426-4435 or the Pet Poison Helpline at (855)
764-7661 (a consultation fee may be applied to your credit card).
If the product is a petroleum product, cleaning solution, strong acid, or strong
alkali, if the substance was ingested more than 3 hours ago, or if your pet is
unconscious, not able to stand, or is having trouble breathing, you must get
your pet to a veterinarian as soon as possible.
If the pet vomits, save a sample of the vomitus for later inspection by the
veterinarian. You can carry it in a ziplock bag.
Read about chemical injuries if a chemical has injured your pet.
What NOT to Do
Do not give any liquid: liquids may move the poison into the body sooner.
Browse the complete Veterinary Partner First Aid collection.
Introduction: First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
Bandaging: First Aid
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Bleeding: First Aid
Bloat: First Aid

8/4/25, 12:09 PM Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4951338&ind=580&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Burns: First Aid
Can't Breathe: First Aid
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Choking: First Aid
Dehydration: First Aid
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Difficult Birth: First Aid
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Electrocution: First Aid
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fever: First Aid
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
Hypothermia: First Aid
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Nosebleed: First Aid
Paralysis: First Aid
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Shock: First Aid
Snakebite: First Aid
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Sunburn: First Aid
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
Wounds: First Aid
Wrapping Up First Aid
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951338&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289538
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:09 PM Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4951338&ind=580&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Biothane muzzle. Picture courtesy of Shannon
Emmons DVM
Preventing Rat Bait Ingestion
Published: April 18, 2025
Hannah Brehaut, CDBC, CCUI, CPDT-KA, LSHC-S
Q: I live in the city, and we regularly encounter rat bait
boxes. How can I prevent my dog from getting too
close and potentially ingesting the bait?
A: City living can be challenging for dogs who like to
explore with their mouths. More than just empty
bottles, cigarette butts, and spilled trash, there are
often rat traps around which could be hazardous to
dogs. Rat poison is usually palatable to dogs, and
symptoms of poisoning do not often show immediately.
Management is always the first step in changing
behavior. Since city trash and rat bait may not be
avoidable, condition your dog to wear a muzzle with a
scavenger guard or a biothane muzzle with a close weave. Guards are available in several
options, from clip-on guards to snap-on attachments. Muzzle conditioning should be a fun,
cooperative experience so your dog learns to love wearing their muzzle.
Having a strong recall might be enough to call your dog away, but the Pattern Game Give Me
a Break teaches your dog to return to you based on something in their environment, such as
a bait box or the smell of poison.
A chewed-looking rat poison box
Start by teaching the game in a neutral and enclosed space. Have a bait box behind an expen, behind a gate, or in a crate so that your dog cannot get close to it. Begin the game by
placing the treat next to the pen, turning your back, and walking away a few feet. When your
dog follows you, offer a treat. After two to three repetitions, increase the distance a few feet,
until eventually you are moving a good distance from the bait with your dog following. When
this is going well, play the game without the barrier, and then in different locations.

8/4/25, 12:14 PM Preventing Rat Bait Ingestion - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12623079&ind=581&objTypeID=10 1/2
It is important not to cue your dog when teaching Give Me a Break. The object, or trigger,
becomes the cue for the dog to recall to you; this is particularly beneficial because you may
not see the poison to call your dog before they have consumed it. The muzzle with
scavenger guard will enable your dog to practice this skill while remaining safe.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=12623079&pid=19239
d47bdc45-73dd-4f47-8b79-b687f87506e1.1754289562
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:14 PM Preventing Rat Bait Ingestion - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=12623079&ind=581&objTypeID=10 2/2

Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 08, 2023
Published: August 09, 2018
The War Against Rodents
Rodent control has been paramount in
human civilization for centuries if not
millennia. Wild rodents consume our
crops, destroy our fabric and paper
products, bring disease, and are
generally unsanitary in our homes. Rat
poisons, as well as traps, are widely
used to control rodent populations in
human communities all over the world.
In the past, anticoagulant rodenticides,
which were effective and available in
virtually every hardware and garden
store, were the most common rat
poisons in the U.S. residential market.
These products were readily consumed by rodents, and after five days or so, they induced
internal bleeding and death. Problems with them included toxicity when they were
accidentally consumed by pets or by predatory wildlife. Either group of animals might
consume the poisons outright or might become poisoned by eating an already intoxicated
rodent. The EPA demanded that these types of poisons be phased out, and presently,
they are only available to commercial exterminators. Demand for safer products rose.
Bromethalin was supposed to represent a better choice. Because only small amounts are
needed to kill a rodent, a predator is unlikely to be harmed by consuming a bromethalinpoisoned rodent. This is good news for owls, hawks, and other rat-consuming wildlife. For
dogs and cats, however, this is only a small advantage, as pets commonly consume the
rodenticide directly. Anticoagulant rodenticides have an antidote in case of accidental
poisoning, while bromethalin has none, and bromethalin products are readily palatable to
dogs and cats.
With anticoagulant rodenticides becoming less available, bromethalin has
captured the home rat poison market and has created a new hazard for pets to
contend with.
What does Bromethalin do?
Bromethalin has been around since 1985, and it is sold as bars, blocks, and pellets to be
used against rats and mice, as well as in the shape of earthworms to be used against
moles. The product can be sprinkled on the ground or, for a safer presentation, provided
inside a plastic bait station accessible to rodents but not to pets.

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=8671284&ind=582&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Bromethalin acts by uncoupling oxidative phosphorylation in the brain. What that means is
that bromethalin makes it impossible to maintain aerobic metabolism in the brain. Oxygen
cannot be used. Without the ability to use oxygen, the brain cannot make enough energy
to fuel itself. The brain swells, and the victim dies of cerebral edema.
Peak levels of bromethalin are achieved a mere four hours after the poison is eaten.
What Does This Mean for a Pet?
There are two forms of poisoning recognized in pets: the high dose (or convulsant form)
and the low dose (or paralytic form).
The Convulsant Form
If a high dose of bromethalin has been consumed, symptoms generally begin in a matter
of hours. The patient will develop hyperexcitability followed by muscle tremors, increased
body temperature, and seizures. Death is virtually inevitable.
The Paralytic Form
If a lower dose has been consumed, symptoms do not show up for one to four days.
Vomiting and appetite loss result. The patient becomes weak in the rear and
uncoordinated. The eyes begin to move involuntarily back and forth (nystagmus) and the
pupils become unequal in size. Muscle tremors culminating in paralysis result. Treatment
is still possible with this form, but it must be aggressive.
Treatment
Treatment for this poisoning must begin immediately, ideally within an hour of eating the
poison. The patient is made to vomit and then must receive several doses of activated
charcoal to bind any poison in the intestinal tract before the patient’s body absorbs it. Use
of activated charcoal can continue for days.
Muscle contractions are treated with sedatives and muscle relaxants. Brain swelling is
treated with diuretics. One study in rodents found that if rats were given ginkgo biloba
immediately, their toxicity symptoms were greatly reduced but no such research has been
performed in dogs or cats.
Survivors may have permanent neurologic deficits and it make take weeks for recovery to
plateau so that permanent damage can be assessed. Many patients will not eat during
treatment and nutritional support, such as an esophagostomy tube, must be employed.
If you use a bromethalin-based rat poison, be sure pet access is impossible as there is no
antidote for this poison and signs are rapid and not easily treated.
Anti-coagulant rodenticides may have their problems, but at least treatment is
straight-forward and there is an antidote.
If you must control rodents, consider the least toxic methods if there are pets in
the vicinity.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is at
no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included in
the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=8671284&ind=582&objTypeID=1007 2/3
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8671284&pid=19239
26d4ffa1-bece-4c56-8414-ef7bc084a419.1754289932
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison (Bromethalin-Based) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=8671284&ind=582&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Blood for transfusion. (Photo courtesy
marvistavet.com)
Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 25, 2020
Published: November 28, 2004
The EPA has been at odds with Reckitt Benckiser (the makers of d-CON) since
1999 when they began seriously scrutinizing the risks of rat poison products to
pets, children, and wildlife. At last, Reckitt Benckiser has aggreed to comply with
the EPA directives. This means that second-generation rat poisons (which kill
rats in one feeding) will be banned from residential use and that rat poisons for
residential use must be secured within bait stations (not in open trays). The
traditional d-CON products have not been manufactured since December 2014
and have not been distributed since March 15, 2015. Bromethalin-based rat poisons
have since captured the residential market. Commercial exterminators may still
use the anticoagulant rodenticides discussed here.
Mankind and the rat have been in conflict for thousands
of years. Rats spread disease, eat our crops, leave
droppings and make nests in our storage areas, and
infest our homes. Rodent removal services are an
important part of pest extermination even in this century.
Rat poison can be obtained in most hardware stores,
grocery stores, and even for free from city agencies in
some areas. While you may want to get rid of rats, you
certainly do not want to pose a hazard to the children or
pets of the family. Research continues to create a product
that fits this bill but in the meantime be aware of the signs
of rat poisoning, particularly if your pet travels with you to
places outside the home where bait may be left out.
There are several types of rodenticides available. The
traditional products are called anticoagulant rodenticides
and are discussed here. If you intend to use a
rodenticide, we encourage you to choose this type
over others as there is a readily available antidote for
the anticoagulant rodenticides. Other rodenticides are more toxic and no antidote is
available. You should know what product, if any, you use at home. Common anticoagulant
rodenticides are: brodifacoum, dopaquinone, warfarin, bromadiolone, and others.
Most of these products include green dyes for a characteristic appearance; however, dogs
and cats have poor color vision and to them these pellets may look like kibbled pet food.
Anticoagulant rodenticides do not produce signs of poisoning for several days
after the toxic dose has been consumed. Anticoagulant rodenticides cause
internal bleeding. A poisoning victim will show weakness and pallor but bleeding
will likely not be obvious externally.
Symptoms

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952117&ind=583&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Most of the time external bleeding is not obvious and you only notice the pet is weak
and/or cold. If you look at the gums, they are pale. Sometimes bloody urine or stool is
evident or nose bleeds may be seen. Signs of bleeding in more than one body location
are a good hint that there is a problem with blood coagulation and appropriate testing and
treatment can be started.
How Does Rat Poison Work?
You would expect the signs of a poisoning to be evident quickly but anticoagulant rat
poisoning signs require at least 5 days to show up. Furthermore, unlike most poisons
where treatment involves managing symptoms until the poison is out of the system, there
is a true antidote for anticoagulant rat poison and it is actually a vitamin. How can this
be? To understand what these poisons do, it is necessary to have some understanding of
how blood clots.
A blood vessel is sort of like a pipe carrying rapidly flowing blood along its path. The pipe
is lined by smooth flat cells called endothelial cells that facilitate the smooth flow of blood.
If the pipe breaks, the structure of the pipe below the lining is exposed to the flowing blood
inside. From there the sequence of events is as follows:
1. The blood vessel automatically constricts and spasms. This restricts the blood
flowing to the damaged area and helps minimize blood loss.
2. The exposed pipe attracts circulating platelets, cloud-like cells that circulate
ready to assist in clotting should the need arise. Platelets clump together over
the tear in the blood vessel, forming a plug within the first five minutes of the
injury. This is all a good thing but the platelets will not stay in place unless a
substance called fibrin can be made to bind them.
3. Generating fibrin is complicated and beyond the scope of this article, but a cascade
of activating proteins is needed to make the tiny protein threads (fibrin) that bind the
platelets and makes a permanent platelet plug on the wound. Four of the proteins
involved are called serine proteases, and these are the factors relevant to
anticoagulant rat poisoning. These four factors must be able to work or there will be
no fibrin, the platelets will not clump properly, and bleeding will continue without
clotting.
About those Four Clotting Factors
The four clotting factor proteins are also called the K-factors because they depend on
vitamin K for activation. After the clotting situation is under control, the used Vitamin K is
recycled in the liver so it will be ready for the next time bleeding needs to be stopped.
Anticoagulant rat poisons interfere with Vitamin K recycling. It takes several days to
deplete the Vitamin K but after that is used up, there is no more and bleeding cannot be
stopped. That is why it takes some 5 days for symptoms to show up and how it is possible
to reverse this poison by giving more Vitamin K.
As long as there is plenty of vitamin K, the serine proteases can be activated and
clotting can proceed normally. The anticoagulant rodenticides abolish vitamin K
recycling. This means that as soon as the body’s active vitamin K reserves are
depleted there can be no meaningful blood clotting.
In cases of poisoning you would expect symptoms to be nearly immediate but in the case
of anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning, it takes several days to deplete vitamin K. After
that, even the smallest of jostles and traumas can lead to life-threatening bleeds.
Testing

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952117&ind=583&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Testing can be done using clotting tests called a PTT (partial thromboplastin time) and PT
(prothrombin time). These tests evaluate the activity of the four K-factors. If both these
tests are abnormal, there is an excellent chance that anticoagulant rat poison is in the
patient's system. The PT test in particular bears special mention as it tests the least stable
of the K-factors called Factor VII. This means that the PT test becomes abnormal before
the PTT test becomes abnormal. When it’s time to monitor a patient for recovery, the PT
test must be normal in order to declare the poisoning resolved.
Another test called the PIVKA (Proteins Induced by Vitamin K Antagonism) test is more
specific. The PIVKA test detects inactive serine proteases. An unusually high amount of
inactive K-factors circulating indicates something is wrong with Vitamin K recycling.
Therapy
If the patient has only just ingested the poison, he or she may be made to vomit it up.
Cathartics and adsorbents can be used to prevent the poison from entering the patient’s
system. Still, it is best to use the antidote anyway. Certainly, if there is evidence that the
patient is bleeding, the antidote obviously is required.
The antidote is simply vitamin K.
Vitamin K is generally started as an injection, and when the patient is stable, tablets are
prescribed. The human formulation, available as a prescription drug at most drug stores,
is a 5 mg tablet. The veterinary strength is a 25 mg tablet. Blood transfusions may be
needed to stabilize a patient who has suffered significant blood loss.
There are different classes of anticoagulant rodenticides, and they remain in the body for
several weeks. It is hard to know when to discontinue therapy, especially if the particular
rodenticide is not known. After a couple of weeks of therapy, the medication is
discontinued. Forty-eight hours later, a PT test is run. If there is still rodenticide in the
patient’s system, the PT will be abnormal, but the patient will not yet have started to bleed.
The results of the PT test will tell the veterinarian whether or not another couple of weeks
of vitamin K are needed.
It is important to return for the recheck PT test on schedule. Waiting an extra day
or two will allow internal bleeding to recur. There is no point in doing the PT test
while the patient is still taking vitamin K. The test must be done 48 hours after
discontinuing the medication.
When the PT test has returned to normal, it is safe to discontinue therapy.
Vitamin K1 Vs. Vitamin K2 Vs. Vitamin K3
There are three forms of vitamin K but only vitamin K1 is used therapeutically. Vitamin K1
is a natural form of vitamin K that is found in plants and absorbed nutritionally. Its more
technical name is phylloquinone. Vitamin K2 (menaquinone) is also natural and is
produced by the body’s intestinal bacteria but apparently not in amounts adequate for
rescue from the anticoagulant rodenticides. Vitamin K3 (menadione) is a synthetic version
that may be injected or taken orally. You may even see it available as a vitamin
supplement tablet.
Within the body vitamin K1 and vitamin K3 are converted to vitamin K2. Vitamin K3 might
seem like an inexpensive way to treat a pet with rat poisoning but unfortunately, K3 is
sometimes toxic and can actually lead to red blood cell destruction. Inexpensive vitamin
K3 pills on the drugstore shelf for over-the-counter sale are not acceptable
antidotes. Vitamin K1 is used because it is absorbed early in the GI tract and concentrates
directly in the liver, which is where the K-factors are activated.

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952117&ind=583&objTypeID=1007 3/4
It is only vitamin K1 that should be considered to be the antidote for anticoagulant
rodenticide poisoning.
Other Rodenticides
While anticoagulant rodenticide poisoning is a life-threatening event, at least there is an
antidote readily available. Other rodenticides are not as readily reversed. These
rodenticides include:
Quintox, Rat-B-Gone, Bromethalin (see an additional article)
Strychnine, gopher bait
Zinc phosphide, gopher bait
Pets Who Eat a Poisoned Rodent
We are commonly asked about the risk to a cat or dog who eats a rodent that has been
poisoned with an anticoagulant rodenticide. The rodent might have already died or simply
not have died yet given that several days are required to feel the effect of these poisons.
The fact is that when you’re talking about the newer generation anticoagulant rat poisons,
such as diphacinone, the risk is real. A greedy rat can eat enough poison to kill 20 rats
before he starts to feel sick, and if this was a second generation rodenticide it will
accumulate in the rat's liver ready to poison the cat that eats the rat's liver. Fortunately,
second-generation rodenticides have been banned for residential use. First-generation
rodenticides are no longer in the rat's body after several hours, making pet poisoning less
of a concern. Furthermore, most rats do not overindulge in poison. The usual patient for
secondary poisoning is a pet or predator that depends heavily on rats for food (a barn cat,
for example). There is some controversy over how often this actually happens, as most
pets do not consume numerous rats.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952117&pid=19239
26d4ffa1-bece-4c56-8414-ef7bc084a419.1754289954
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:15 PM Rat Poison's Effect on Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4952117&ind=583&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Slug bait. Photo by Lisa Marie McKay
Snail Bait Poisoning in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 16, 2022
Published: January 01, 2009
Snails and slugs are frustrating garden
pests wherever anyone is trying to grow
tender flowers or ornamental plants. While
effective non-toxic methods abound on the
internet, snail bait and snail poisons are
readily available in most garden supply
stores and pose a significant hazard to the
pet dogs that share the garden.
Snail bait poisoning continues to be a
frequent toxicity issue for dogs in any area
where snails are common garden pests.
Not that malicious poisoning is the issue;
most cases are accidental as many
gardens with snail problems also have
resident dogs. Snail bait is typically
formulated in pellets and flavored with
molasses or bran to attract snails.
Unfortunately, the pellets resemble kibbled
dog food and the molasses and bran are
also attractive to dogs. Snail baits are also
available as liquids and powders that can
get onto paws and be licked off in normal
grooming. Very little metaldehyde snail bait
is required to cause poisoning: less than a
teaspoon per 10 pounds of body weight.
Many snail bait products also contain insecticides that make them even more toxic. If at all
possible, find out what specific product has been involved in the poisoning so that the
veterinarian and animal poison control can determine proper treatment.
In a 2002 retrospective study by the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, 28 percent
of all metaldehyde poisoning cases happened in California.
Obvious Twitching
Signs of poisoning begin fairly quickly after the poison is consumed. The dog will begin
anxious twitching, at first only slightly and then uncontrollably. This progresses to seizures
and potentially to death. The muscle contractions of the twitches raise body temperature
so high that brain damage can result, leading to the colloquial emergency room term
“shake and bake” syndrome.

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Snail Bait Poisoning in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4951893&ind=584&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Photo courtesy of Mar Vista Vet
Patients can also exhibit racing heart rates, vomiting, diarrhea, and rigidity, and respiratory
failure.
A liver failure syndrome occurs in some patients approximately two to three days after
poisoning, so it is important for liver enzymes to be monitored by blood tests throughout
the recovery period. Additional liver support medicine may be needed.
Making The Diagnosis
Generally, the appearance of a twitching patient is characteristic even if there is no known
history of snail bait exposure. Testing of stomach contents or urine for metaldehyde can
be done, but is generally not necessary.
Treatment
There is no direct antidote for
metaldehyde toxicity; treatment is
aimed at controlling the muscle
contractions. If less than one hour has
passed since exposure, it may be
possible to induce vomiting. If the
patient is already twitching badly, the
stimulation involved in inducing
vomiting may not be in the patient’s
best interest. In this case, the patient
can be anesthetized and the stomach
pumped. Activated charcoal can be
given to prevent absorption of
metaldehyde into the body from the
intestine. Cathartics (used to induce
diarrhea) can also be used with the
activated charcoal to help remove the
metaldehyde from the intestinal tract
promptly.
Twitching can be controlled with
methocarbamol (a muscle relaxant) or
injectable benzodiazepine sedatives
such as diazepam. Fluid therapy and
body temperature monitoring will be
needed throughout the recovery period.
Potential for complete recovery depends on how much poison was ingested, how quickly
therapy was begun, and the general health of the patient. While this is a serious type of
poisoning, most patients have a good chance at recovery if treated properly.
At home, the yard should be hosed down with water to dissolve the remaining
metaldehyde, and the dog should be restricted from the treated area for a two-week
period.
This page is dedicated to Justin, a companion to Saeeda, who did not survive his
exposure to metaldehyde. We promised to put up a web page in his honor to help educate
dog owners and hopefully save the lives of some snail-bait poisoned dogs around the
world.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Snail Bait Poisoning in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4951893&ind=584&objTypeID=1007 2/3
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951893&pid=19239
26d4ffa1-bece-4c56-8414-ef7bc084a419.1754289977
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Snail Bait Poisoning in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=4951893&ind=584&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use
Around Your Pets
Jacqueline Brister, DVM; Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABT, DABVT
Revised: April 14, 2025
Published: March 25, 2020
Many household cleaners are safe to use
around your pets, especially if the product is
allowed to dry or your pet is only exposed to
small amounts. But some can be hazardous
to a dog's or cat’s health, and it can be
confusing to know the difference. Read on to
find out which common cleaning and
disinfecting products can be problematic for
your furry friends.
Remember to Read the Labels and Use
Your Thinking Cap
As a rule, common cleaning and disinfecting
products made for the surfaces in your home are not meant to be used on yourself. For
example, don’t use surface disinfection wipes on your skin. If something isn’t safe for your
skin, don’t put it on your pet either. Never spray or wipe down your pet with cleaning
products. Avoid getting cleaners into the eyes, mouth, or nose, just as you would with
yourself. Read product labels and make sure the product is safe for pets.
Call your veterinarian if you are unsure if something is safe or if you think your
pet has had access to something toxic. You can also check online or call (for a
fee) the ASPCA’s Animal Poison Control.
Acidic Products
Acidic products can be found in cleaning agents, such as toilet bowl cleaners. They can
cause severe damage to any tissue they contact, especially if eaten or put in the eyes.
Signs of contact start to occur immediately and can include pain, crying/whimpering,
trouble swallowing, vomiting, mouth and esophageal sores/ulcers, skin redness and
sores, or eye redness and squinting. After calling your veterinarian, offer water or milk if
the product was eaten, or rinse the area (ideally 10-15 minutes) with room temperature
water.
Alkaline Products
Alkaline cleaning products, generally found in drain openers, dishwasher detergents, and
toilet bowl cleaners, include sodium hydroxide (lye), potassium hydroxide, ammonium
hydroxide (household ammonia), and potassium permanganate. These products can
penetrate deeply into the tissues on contact and cause significant damage. Unlike acidic
products, pain is not immediate, so signs of an issue may not be obvious initially. Clinical
signs of alkaline product ingestion include drooling, refusal to eat, fever, oral redness and

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=9570378&ind=585&objTypeID=1007 1/3
ulcers, trouble swallowing, vomiting, belly pain, and dark, tarry stools. Eye or skin contact
can lead to redness. Call your veterinarian and flush the mouth or affected skin areas for
10-15 minutes with room temperature water.
Bleach
Liquid bleach is made of sodium hypochlorite. If it comes in contact with the skin or eyes,
it can irritate and cause pain or redness. If inhaled, it will irritate the respiratory tract,
causing sneezing and trouble breathing. If ingested, bleach products can irritate your pet's
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, causing vomiting, loose stool, and poor appetite.
Highly concentrated bleach (6% sodium hypochlorite or higher, also called “ultra bleach”)
can cause severe damage if eaten, such as mouth and GI tract ulcers. In addition to
calling your veterinarian, offer milk if your pet has eaten bleach. If bleach has come in
contact with skin, bathe your pet in liquid dishwashing soap until the bleach smell is gone.
Bleach combined with an acidic cleaner is dangerous, as it can create hypochlorous acid
and chlorine gas, which is toxic if inhaled. This gas can cause inflammation/irritation of the
mouth, throat, and GI tract, and is also toxic to humans.
Cationic Detergents (also known as Quaternary Ammonia Compounds)
All-purpose cleaners and sanitizing products are common cationic detergents. Sanitizers
include surface disinfecting wipes, pool algaecides, some fabric softeners, some dryer
sheets, some laundry detergents (especially liquid ones), and some toilet tank drop-in
products (these are only concerns if the tablet or capsule itself is ingested, but they're safe
after being diluted in toilet water). Household products in the U.S. that have cationic
detergents must be listed under the ingredient list on the front label. Cleaners with no list
on the front label would not have cationics or bleach in them. Even at low concentrations
(2%), they can cause signs similar to those of alkaline products. If ingested, signs may
include weakness, twitching, seizures, collapse, and trouble breathing. Call your
veterinarian, then feed milk if the product was ingested or use dishwashing liquid to
remove the product from the skin.
Detergents (Non-Ionic/Anionic) and Soaps
Non-ionic and anionic detergents can be found in many types of soaps, such as hand
soap and shampoo, and in cleaning products such as hand dishwashing detergent. For
the most part, the toxicity level in soaps is mild. These can cause irritation if they get into
the eyes, after which you may see eye redness or squinting. If eye irritation has occurred,
rinse your pet’s eyes with room temperature water or saline solution. If these products are
eaten, they can cause stomach upset, vomiting, and loose stools. If these signs are seen,
call your veterinarian immediately.
Hand Sanitizers and Alcohol
Isopropanol, also known as rubbing alcohol, is absorbed quickly by mouth and is readily
absorbed through the skin, which can cause alcohol toxicity if enough is absorbed.
Breathing fumes can also be problematic in small, confined areas. Ethanol and ethyl
alcohol are similar types of alcohol, all of which can be found in hand sanitizer. Usually,
hand sanitizers have other ingredients such as propylene glycol to give them a jelly-like
consistency. Propylene glycol and ethanol or ethyl alcohol are NOT the same thing as
what is found in antifreeze, which is ethylene glycol. Hand sanitizers do not cause
antifreeze poisoning. Most hand sanitizers are rarely an issue if eaten in very small
amounts (e.g., a pet licking your hands after you put some on yourself). Signs of alcohol
toxicity, although very rare, can include vomiting, wobbliness, twitching, trouble breathing,
or coma. If these signs are noted, see your veterinarian immediately, and keep your pet
warm.
Phenols

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=9570378&ind=585&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The levels of phenols in household cleaners are generally not toxic enough to be of
concern anymore; if exposed, you may see similar signs of exposure to anionic/nonionic
detergents. Phenols can be found in antiseptics, germicides, household cleaners with pine
oil products, and disinfectants, such as cleaning sprays. Phenols can cause problems in
the GI tract if eaten. Direct irritation can be an issue if your pet walks on a surface that
isn’t yet dry. Cats seem to be especially sensitive to these products. Pain, redness, and
ulcers may be noted on the skin or paws with contact. If your pet eats the product, rapid
breathing, tremors, twitching, and incoordination can be seen. Call your veterinarian and
bathe your pet with liquid dish soap if the product contacts the skin.
If You Are Unsure
The ASPCA Poison Control Center says that most cleaning agents can be used safely in
homes if label recommendations are followed. In this scenario, it's better safe than sorry. If
you have doubts about using a product that your dog or cat can encounter, check with an
animal poison control center or call your veterinarian.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours daily at 888-426-4435.
Expect an initial consultation fee, and additional follow-up is at no charge. You will be
assigned a case number that your veterinarian can use to communicate with a toxicology
specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included in
the premium service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9570378&pid=19239
26d4ffa1-bece-4c56-8414-ef7bc084a419.1754290006
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:16 PM Toxic Disinfectants: What to Use and What Not to Use Around Your Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254104&id=9570378&ind=585&objTypeID=1007 3/3


