Illustration by CDC
Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: December 26, 2019
Anaplasmosis is a disease affecting
dogs (and rarely cats) caused by
Anaplasma phagocytophilum. This
infectious organism is an unusual
type of bacteria known as a rickettsial
agent/bacterium. The disease is
transmitted by a tick bite. As with
some other tick-borne diseases, a tick
must remain attached to the pet for
more than 24 hours for the infection
to be transferred.
It has been reported from around the
world in a variety of animals.
Signs of Anaplasmosis
Signs usually begin 1 to 2 weeks after
the tick bite. Anaplasmosis organisms
enter the bloodstream and live in the
animal’s white blood cells, which
normally aid in fighting infections.
This invasion of circulating white
blood cells creates inflammation
throughout the body. Signs can include poor appetite and fever. Joints are commonly
affected, making the pet seem stiff or painful or appear to have trouble walking.
Sometimes pets may have signs associated with bleeding as well. A bloody nose, dark
bloody stool, or bruising may be seen.
Not all pets will have symptoms. Some pets will only appear sick for a short time, then
start to improve. It isn't fully understood why this happens, but it may be associated with a
pet’s ability to fight off the infection.
Diagnosing Anaplasmosis
A veterinarian’s physical examination may not be useful as a sole means of diagnosis;
however, in pets showing signs, it will point the veterinarian in the right direction for
testing. A complete blood count, also known as a CBC, may indicate a decrease in red
blood cells (anemia), or a decrease in platelets (thrombocytopenia). Sometimes
anaplasmosis can be diagnosed by finding the organisms in a blood sample by using a
microscope.
Additional lab tests may needed to confirm the diagnosis. Occasionally, these tests can be
positive in a dog or cat who is not showing symptoms. This does not necessarily mean the
pet has the disease, but it can mean that they were exposed to it at one point. The

8/3/25, 12:00 AM Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9442535&ind=306&objTypeID=1007 1/2
veterinarian will then need to take into account the exam, signs, and the rest of the lab
work to make a proper diagnosis.
Treatment and Recovery
Anaplasmosis is treated with certain types of antibiotics, most commonly doxycycline.
Treatment is usually for 2-4 weeks; the longer course tends to be given if the pet also
has Lyme disease, but it all depends on the specific case. Pets usually feel better within a
few days after taking the antibiotic. If the anemia or thrombocytopenia are severe, a blood
transfusion may also be needed. Most dogs and cats make a full recovery.
Prevention
No vaccine is available to prevent anaplasmosis. The best form of prevention is tick
control, either through treating the yard or through applying tick preventive medications to
the pet. Consult your veterinarian for the best prevention options for each pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9442535&pid=19239
06b20950-090d-4e93-9319-1fa0fd63520e.1754159158
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:00 AM Anaplasmosis in Dogs and Cats Is Tick-Borne - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9442535&ind=306&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Dog with nasal discharge From Aspergillosis. Photo Courtesy Dr.
Kimberly Morrissey
Aspergillosis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 01, 2023
Published: April 19, 2007
Fungi of the Aspergillus genus are well known to most people as the lacy, fluffy mold that
grows on foods kept a bit too long. There are over 180 species of Aspergillus fungi, and
they generally do not cause disease unless the host has a compromised immune system
or has a big exposure to the fungus. The most common species to cause problems in
veterinary patients are Aspergillus fumigatus (which typically infects the nose and nasal
passages) and Aspergillus terreus (which causes systemic/whole-body disease).
Under the microscope, Aspergillus looks like a beautiful flower, but note the spores (called
conidia) it sheds. These float in the air to colonize organic matter or infect a host when
they land.
Sinonasal (Nose) Aspergillosis
Sinonasal aspergillosis is the most
common type of Aspergillus infection.
Sinonasal infections can be very
invasive or less invasive, the very
invasive kind unfortunately being much
more common. Invasive infections
actually destroy the delicate bones of
the nasal sinuses while the less
invasive infections involve formatting a
big mucous wad of fungus called a
"fungal ball" or "aspergilloma."
Advanced imaging can detect either of
these, but more on that later. What the
owner usually sees is a snotty nasal
discharge that often stinks, lasts for
months, does not respond to antibiotics,
and classically only comes from one
nostril. Nose bleeds occur intermittently,
and the edges of the nostrils are often ulcerated. Both the more invasive and less invasive
forms create similar signs; it is imaging and/or rhinoscopy that usually tell them apart, and
sometimes they occur together.
Classically, the affected dog is of a breed with a long nose (collie, greyhound, dachshund,
etc.), though in one study, retrievers and rottweilers showed the highest numbers, possibly
suggesting they do more sniffing in fungal-contaminated areas. Any age dog could
become infected, though Aspergillus infection is unusual in dogs under the age of one
year.
To diagnose sinonasal aspergillosis, two out of the following criteria must be met:

8/3/25, 12:00 AM Aspergillosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952634&ind=307&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Imaging (ideally CT or MRI) should be compatible with a fungal infection. This
means bone destruction is visible. Radiographs can also be used, but CT and MRI
offer superior imaging.
Fungal colonies should be visible with rhinoscopy (a technique where a narrow
needlelike camera is inserted in the nose).
Aspergillus organisms are seen in or cultured from either a tissue biopsy or the
nasal discharge.
A blood test (either antibody level, test for fungal cell wall galactomannan, or
PCR test) or a urine test for galactomannan antigen is positive against
an Aspergillus species.
A typical approach to a dog with a nasal discharge suggestive of fungal infection will likely
involve imaging, followed by rhinoscopy. General anesthesia is needed for both of these
procedures and referral is likely to be recommended as specialized equipment will likely
be necessary.
The treatment of aspergillosis has been challenging for many years; fungal infections, as
a rule, are slow to clear, and for a long time, the only available drugs had toxic side
effects. Today, sinonasal aspergillosis has a good prognosis thanks to a unique treatment
plan. The patient is anesthetized, and the back of the throat is closed off with gauze and
inflatable balloon catheters called Foley catheters. The nostrils are also closed off (the
patient breathes through an endotracheal tube that is placed through the mouth) and a
one percent solution of clotrimazole, a topical antifungal lotion, is infused into the nose
and frontal sinuses. The solution incubates for an hour, and the patient is periodically
turned to be sure all the nooks and crannies of the sinuses are treated. At the end of the
incubation, the clotrimazole is drained through the nostrils and suctioned out.
This treatment is highly effective, with an 86 percent success rate, though about one-third
of patients require several treatments. Most of the time, the nasal discharge has resolved
within a couple of weeks, but if there is still evidence of continuing infection one month
after the treatment, the patient should be rechecked, and another bout of treatment will
most likely be needed.
If there is evidence that the infection has eroded through the sinus bones and has
penetrated the brain, the treatment described above cannot be used, and oral medication
is needed. Common medications used are itraconazole and fluconazole. Several months
of therapy are needed, and a 60 to 70 percent success rate has been reported.
Disseminated Aspergillosis
As shown in the photograph, Aspergillus
fungi shed microscopic spores that float in
the air and which we inhale all the time.
Fortunately, we have an assortment of
safety mechanisms built into our bodies
that prevent infection (sinuses to trap
inhaled debris, the ability to sneeze, the
mucus lining of the entire respiratory tract
to trap debris, cilia to remove mucus with
trapped debris, and an immune system to
fight infection). If Aspergillus spores called
conidia escape these mechanisms and
begin to grow, they become more difficult
for the body to remove. In disseminated
aspergillosis, the fungus penetrates the
respiratory tract and may travel to other

8/3/25, 12:00 AM Aspergillosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952634&ind=307&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Under the microscope Aspergillus looks like a beautiful
flower but note the spores (called conidia) it sheds. These
float in the air to colonize organic matter or infect a host
when they land. Photo Courtesy CDC.
organs via the bloodstream, creating a
more serious fungal invasion. German
Shepherd Dogs seem to be predisposed
to this type of dissemination.
Signs experienced by the patient depend
on where the fungus settles. Bone infection is common, and the intervertebral discs of the
spine also tend to be favorite spots for Aspergillus. This means that clinical features
commonly include lameness, weakness, and incoordination. Frequently, there are draining
tracts (holes with pus or bloody discharge oozing out) in the areas of infection. Fever,
weight loss, appetite loss, and uveitis (deep inflammation of the eye) are also features.
Sadly, most dogs are already terminally ill by the time they are first examined.
Diagnosis is tricky. Bone destruction patterns on radiographs may be suggestive of fungal
infection. If you’re lucky, the organism can be identified in some of the draining fluid or in a
tissue sample. If the organism is not visible, it may be cultured from a fluid or tissue
sample. Ideally, there would be a blood test for Aspergillus antibodies that could make the
diagnosis non-invasively, and while such antibody tests exist, it is hard to interpret them.
There are accuracy issues, plus different species of Aspergillus do not cross-react, so one
must test separately for each Aspergillus species.
Treatment is particularly frustrating for disseminated aspergillosis. At present,
posaconazole seems to be the best choice, but years of treatment are likely required (very
likely the medication will be for life), and many dogs still die of their disease before the
medication can get the condition controlled. If the body part involved can be surgically
removed (such as amputation of a bone), this can be curative, and, as distasteful as it
may sound, aggressive surgery could be a dog's only chance of survival.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952634&pid=19239
9b200352-0135-46e4-b426-6c99cb5069d7.1754159435
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:00 AM Aspergillosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952634&ind=307&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Rhipicephalus sanguineus: the most
common tick to spread Babesia in the
United States. Image courtesy of CDC
Babesia Infection in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 09, 2024
Published: April 10, 2004
Most people have never heard of Babesia organisms, though they have caused red blood
cell destruction in their canine hosts all over the world for thousands of
years. Babesia organisms are spread by ticks and are particularly significant to racing
greyhounds and pit bull terriers. Humans may also become infected.
There are over 100 species of Babesia, but only a few are found in the U.S. and are
transmissible to dogs. Infected red blood cells are identified and destroyed, thus killing
the Babesia organisms within them, but, unfortunately, if many red blood cells are infected,
this leaves the host with anemia, a lack of red blood cells. Babesia species continue to be
classified and sub-classified worldwide.
The Babesia species that infect dogs in North America are:
Babesia canis - a larger species of Babesia, transmitted by ticks.
Babesia gibsoni - a smaller Babesia species that mostly attack pit bull terriers
and is transmitted by bite wounds and from mother to unborn puppies. This is
the most common Babesia in North America.
Babesia conradae - a smaller Babesia species that has only been isolated in
California.
Babesia microti is the species of Babesia that infects humans. A "Babesia
microti-like" Babesia has been found in dogs in North America.
How Infection Happens and what Happens Next
Infection occurs when a Babesia-infected tick bites a dog
and releases Babesia sporozoites into the dog’s
bloodstream. A tick must feed for two to three days to
infect a dog with Babesia. The young Babesia organisms
attach to red blood cells, eventually penetrating and
making a new home within the cells. Inside the red blood
cell, the Babesia organism sheds its outer coating and
begins to divide, becoming a new form called a
“merozoite” which a new tick may drink in during a blood
meal.
Infected pregnant dogs can spread Babesia to their
unborn puppies, and dogs can transmit the organism by
biting another dog as well. (In fact, for Babesia gibsoni,
which is primarily a pit bull terrier infection, ticks are a
minor cause of infection, with maternal transmission and
bite wounds as the chief routes of transmission.)

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Babesia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952053&ind=308&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Having a parasite in your red blood cells does not go undetected by your immune
system. Infected red blood cells are identified and destroyed, thus killing the Babesia
organisms within them, but, unfortunately, if many red blood cells are infected, this leaves
the host with anemia, a lack of red blood cells. Often the host’s immune system will begin
destroying the uninfected red cells as well, a condition called immune-mediated hemolytic
anemia (IMHA). Signs include weakness, yellowing of the soft tissues ("jaundice"), fever,
and red or orange-colored urine.
Making matters worse is the fact that animals seem to get sicker than the degree of
anemia would suggest so there is more to this infection than the destruction of red blood
cells. The severe inflammation that is associated with this parasitism can be
overwhelming and completely separate from the anemia. Platelet counts can drop,
impairing normal blood clotting (especially a problem with Babesia gibsoni).
An assortment of neurologic signs of can occur with Babesia infection when parasites
gather inside the central nervous system and generate a more localized focus of
inflammation. In severe cases, there is a lung injury similar to what people with late-stage
malaria can experience. Babesia conradae seems predisposed to creating liver disease.
If the acute signs are relatively mild or at least non-lethal, a chronic infection can develop.
This is usually without signs, but the dog may continue to be a source of infection by
feeding ticks. Relapses can also occur in times of stress.
Because babesiosis is a tick-borne infection, it is not unusual for infected dogs to have
other tick-borne infections such as Ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever, and others.
These infections may interact to make each other more severe.
Young dogs tend to be most severely infected, especially pit bull terriers.
Diagnosis of Babesiosis
With luck, the Babesia organisms can be seen on a blood smear. Babesia canis
organisms are tear-shaped and occur in pairs. Other Babesia species have several forms
in which they appear. The odds of finding the organism are improved by checking freshly
drawn blood taken from a capillary source (a small cut to an ear, for example) rather than
from a blood vessel. If Babesia organisms are found, the patient is definitely infected but
in most cases, they are not found so an alternative method of diagnosis is needed.
Antibody testing has been problematic as infected animals may have circulating
antibodies long after the organism is gone or may have no antibodies circulating while the
few organisms remain hidden inside red blood cells.
The newest method of diagnosis involves testing for Babesia DNA. This type of testing is
called PCR testing and is extremely sensitive, able to distinguish four different species.
This is especially valuable information as the different species are sensitive to different
medications.
Current recommendations are to do both antibody testing (serology) as well as DNA
testing (PCR) as the information is felt to be complementary. If a patient is strongly
suspected to be suffering from babesiosis, treatment should begin promptly without
waiting for test results. After treatment is completed, PCR testing should be repeated
starting 60 days post-treatment and again two to four weeks after that.
Babesia Treatment
Before 2004, an assortment of unpleasant drugs were used against Babesia with mixed
success. What medications you will need to use to treat a Babesia infection turns out to
depend on which species of Babesia the patient is infected with. There are two Babesia
species that are particularly challenging: Babesia gibsoni (the one that involves primarily
pit bull terriers) and Babesia conradae (the Babesia found only in Southern California).

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Babesia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952053&ind=308&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Babesia organisms are seen within erythrocytes and also
as extracellular organisms. Courtesy Dr. Rebecca Quam.
Since 2004 a new protocol has emerged for
Babesia of either the gibsoni or conradae
species using atovaquone and azithromycin
in combination. These two medications stop
reproduction so that the host's immune
system has time to gain the upper hand and
remove the organisms without their numbers
increasing. Side effects are few to none, and
improvement is generally obvious within the
first week. Unfortunately, atovaquone is
expensive, and pharmacies are reluctant to
sell less than an entire bottle. It is often
tempting to use the version of atovaquone
that comes combined with proguanil, another
anti-protozoal drug, but this version has not
been evaluated thoroughly against Babesia
and is famous for inducing severe nausea in
dogs. Imidocarb, one of the earlier
treatments, can be started while the correct
formulation of atovaquone is obtained; it is
best not to use azithromycin alone during
that time, or resistance may develop.
If atovaquone simply proves too expensive,
the patient can be treated with imidocarb as
was done in the past until such a time that it
is possible to save up for the atovaquone/azithromycin protocol. Imidocarb creates a
remission from the physical illness for an extended time but does not actually clear the
infection.
If imidocarb is employed, a single dose is usually effective for Babesia canis but
two given two weeks apart are needed for the smaller Babesia species. The
injection is painful, plus it causes muscle tremors, drooling, elevated heart rate,
shivering, fever, facial swelling, tearing of the eyes, and restlessness. Pretreatment with an injection of atropine helps palliate these side effects.
Occasionally a strain of Babesia gibsoni is resistant to atovaquone. When this happens,
imidocarb can be used as described above with the addition of doxycycline, clindamycin,
and metronidazole for a three-month period.
For Babesia canis, two doses of imidocarb, as described above, should
generally completely clear the infection. The use of atovaquone appears to be
unnecessary.
A vaccine is available against Babesia in France but only seems effective against certain
strains. Vaccination is 89% effective in France. The best prevention is aimed at tick
control.
Racing Greyhounds
Since areas where greyhounds are
professionally raced tend to be areas with
ticks, racing greyhounds are commonly
infected with Babesia. Whether these
infections become active remains to be
seen as the carrier state seems to be
common in infected dogs. As racing
greyhounds end their careers and enter the

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Babesia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952053&ind=308&objTypeID=1007 3/4
A racing greyhound. Courtesy MarVistaVet
adoption system, Babesia infection is
commonly screened. An apparently healthy
but positive-testing dog can still be adopted
with the understanding that active infection
is unlikely but possible. Such a dog could
transmit her Babesia infection to other dogs
via ticks or bite wounds and should certainly
never be used as a blood donor.
Human Babesiosis
The species of Babesia that infect pets
should not pose any problems to people
with normal immune systems. People with
compromised immune systems or people who have had their spleens removed may have
some concerns. In the U.S., babesiosis usually occurs on the East Coast and along the
Great Lakes and stems from tick bites. Most signs are mild or easily treated, but a five
percent mortality rate has been reported. The usual organism is Babesia microti.
Read more about human infection from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952053&pid=19239
9b200352-0135-46e4-b426-6c99cb5069d7.1754159459
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Babesia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952053&ind=308&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Campylobacter organisms grown in culture. Note their characteristic
wavy shape. Image courtesy CDC.
Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: December 16, 2023
Published: January 31, 2006
Bacterial diarrheas are generally a nuisance for the adult animal but can be lethal to a
small puppy, kitten, or even a human baby. Most of these problems stem from
contaminated food or fecal contaminated environment. Feeding raw food diets to pets
dramatically increases the exposure to infectious organisms to the humans in the family.
Since these conditions are also human diseases, it is helpful to have some understanding
of what they are, even if there are no young pets or immune-suppressed individuals
(human or otherwise) at home.
Campylobacter
Campylobacter species are a group
of bacteria capable of causing
diarrhea in dogs, cats, humans, and
other animals. They have a unique
curved appearance under the
microscope and are said to be sea
gull-shaped. They are difficult to
isolate as they grow in conditions of
low oxygen (making them
microaerophilic as opposed to being
aerobic or anaerobic bacteria). With
regard to pets, Campylobacter are
generally a problem for the very
young. Puppies and kittens have not
yet matured immunologically. Plus,
because they are small, fluid loss
from diarrhea hits them much
harder. Furthermore, puppies and kittens are more likely to be housed in groups where
fecal cross-contamination is common so they may be more likely to become infected than
adult animals. Adult animals commonly have Campylobacter organisms living in their
intestines, but they do not experience any sickness due to it.
In humans, Campylobacter infection is a leading cause of gastrointestinal (GI) disease;
infected dogs and cats can carry the organism and spread it even if they do not have
symptoms themselves. For this reason, pets used for therapy in assisted living
communities and similar situations should be screened for Campylobacter by fecal culture
before exposure to people with suppressed immunity. Humans are also infected by
consumption of contaminated food, water, or raw milk; only 6% of human Campylobacter
infections are attributed to dog exposure. That said, exposure to a dog with diarrhea
triples a person’s risk for developing enteritis from Campylobacter jejuni or Campylobacter
coli. Studies screening pet animals for inapparent Campylobacter infections have found
surprisingly high incidences of inapparent infection. In one study in the Midwest, 24% of
152 healthy cats were positive, for example.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952423&ind=309&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Salmonella. Image courtesy CDC
After consuming Campylobacter organisms, they travel to the lower small intestine, attach,
and multiply. They produce a toxin that destroys the lining of the intestine with the result
being a bloody, mucous diarrhea (though occasionally a more watery diarrhea is
described). Sometimes a fever results, appetite becomes poor, and vomiting can occur.
Incubation is 2 to 5 days. The organism can survive as long as a month in environmental
feces.
Diagnosis is made by seeing the sea gull-shaped organisms under the microscope;
however, there are so many bacterial organisms on a fecal sample that finding the culprit
can be tricky. For this reason, a culture is often performed as a more accurate test.
Because the organism is microaerophilic, specific culture requirements must be met; the
facilities of a reference laboratory are needed.
Treatment is with appropriate antibiotics, such as erythromycin, chloramphenicol or tylosin.
Salmonella
Most people are somewhat familiar with
Salmonella. They know it represents a type of food
poisoning, probably know it is associated with
diarrhea that can be severe, and may even know that
Salmonella species are bacteria. Most human cases
of Salmonella infection cause fever, diarrhea, and
cramping that go away on their own, but in children, it
can produce more severe disease. As with
Campylobacter, the young are more susceptible to
more severe illness because they are smaller and do
not have mature immunity. The same is true with
puppies and kittens; adult animals are almost never
affected by Salmonella infection.
An important exception to the "Salmonella is rare in adult dogs" rule is the case of dogs
fed a raw food diet. It has become popular to feed raw foods to pets with the idea that a
raw food diet more closely approximates the natural diet that the feline or canine body
evolved to consume, and thus, such a diet should be healthier than commercially
prepared foods. In fact, cooking food is central to removing parasites, bacteria, and
bacterial toxins from food. A recent study evaluating raw food diets found that 80% of food
samples contained Salmonella bacteria and that 30% of the dogs in the study were
shedding Salmonella bacteria in their stool. Adult dogs are often asymptomatic, but any
infected animal or person will shed the organism for at least six weeks, thus acting as a
source of exposure to other animals or people. Salmonella organisms are difficult to
remove from the environment and easily survive three months in soil. Again, dogs used for
therapy around the elderly or children should be cultured for Salmonella.
There are two syndromes associated with Salmonella: diarrhea and sepsis. Salmonella
bacteria, once consumed, attach to the intestine and secrete toxins. The toxins produce
diarrhea that can be severe and even life-threatening in the young. If this were not bad
enough, some Salmonella can produce an even more serious “part two" (sepsis) should
these bacteria invade the body through the damaged intestine, causing a more
widespread and much more serious infection.
In young animals, the syndrome resulting is similar to that of canine parvovirus thus
similar treatment is expected.
E. Coli
Escherichia coli may be the most common
bacterial organism in the world. It lives in our
intestines naturally and covers the world we
live in. Unfortunately, some strains of E. coli

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952423&ind=309&objTypeID=1007 2/4
are not so neighborly and are capable of
producing diarrhea via toxin production. Like
the other organisms we have discussed, this
is a serious problem for the very young and
more of a nuisance for adults. There are
three main types of unfriendly E. coli:
Enterotoxic E. coli, enterohemorrhagic E.
coli, and enteropathogenic E. coli.
Enterotoxigenic E. coli is a common cause of
diarrhea in young animals as well as human
infants and is responsible for the famous
traveler’s diarrhea. These bacteria produce
what is called an enterotoxin in the upper
small intestine. This toxin, similar to the toxin
of cholera, causes the intestine cells to
secrete the body's fluid into the intestine, creating spectacular watery diarrhea and what
can be life-threatening dehydration for smaller living creatures. Young pigs, cattle, and
other livestock are commonly lost to this kind of dehydration. Again, the younger and
smaller the patient is, the more serious this infection is.
Enteropathogenic E. coli also produce diarrhea in humans and animals. Rather than a
secretory diarrhea as above, they simply destroy the intestinal cells where they attach.
Diarrhea still results, but it creates more damage to the intestinal lining.
Enterohemorrhagic E. coli is similar to enteropathogenic E. coli but with more associated
inflammation. This type does not seem to be a problem for small animals though they can
carry it asymptomatically.
It would seem that antibiotics would be the obvious treatment for a bacterial disease, yet
for E. coli it is surprisingly controversial. It seems that the use of antibiotics can enhance
the synthesis of toxins by these bacteria; plus, oftentimes, antibiotic use only serves to
make E. coli more resistant in the GI tract. Antibiotics are generally reserved for those
animals (or people) who seem the most sick or who have evidence of bacterial invasion in
the bloodstream. Basically, treatment is supportive care until the patient's immune system
regains the upper hand.
In Conclusion
Bacterial diarrheas are an especially serious consideration in the very young and in the
weak or compromised, be they human or non-human. It is not unusual for apparently
healthy animals to carry these organisms and shed them into the environment and feeding
raw foods greatly increases the risk of this kind of latent infection. If you are considering
raw food diets, especially if someone in the home is very young or has a compromised
immunity, discuss prevention of these infections with your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952423&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159481
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952423&ind=309&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Bacterial Diarrheas in Puppies & Kittens - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952423&ind=309&objTypeID=1007 4/4

SARS-CoV2 virus (agent of Covid-19) (Image
Courtesy of Alissa Eckert, MSMI; Dan Higgins,
MAMS; CDC Public Health image library)
HIV virus particles (Photo courtesy
of CDC)
Basic Virology
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 22, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
This virology review is meant to help beginners
understand how viral infections work and how we
survive them. Virology is a complicated subject, as
is immunology, and the following is meant as a sort
of kindergarten of terms and events. We think it is
helpful in understanding the biology of what
happens with viral infections.
What is a Virus?
Viruses are strange life forms. They have only the
bare bones of biochemical equipment, barely
enough to even qualify for the title of life form.
They have only one type of nucleic acid (either
DNA or RNA, but not both.)
They reproduce solely from this nucleic acid,
whichever type it is.
They do not have any metabolic enzymes.
They are completely dependent on their host cell.
Some Definitions:
Viral Particle
One little individual virus is called a viral particle. Viral
particles are so small (some are the size of a large protein
molecule) that we cannot really call them creatures; they are more like particles, hence
the term. The word virus is more correctly applied to a species or genus of the virus rather
than to the individual particles.
Capsid
The nucleic acids (the DNA or RNA) within the viral particles are
surrounded by a protein coat and sometimes by an additional
fatty envelope. The capsid consists of this protein coat and any
fatty layer. The capsid proteins are crucial to the virus's ability to
attach and infect a host cell.
Viruses with fatty envelopes generally do not last long in the
environment as the fat is easily disrupted. (Recall the emphasis
on washing one's hands during the 2020 Covid pandemic. The
Covid virus has a fatty envelope easily disrupted by simple hand
soap. More sturdy viruses require several minutes of contact with bleach to be disrupted.)

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Basic Virology - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951458&ind=310&objTypeID=1007 1/4
The canine parvovirus. Image
by JY Sgro, UW-Madison
Fatty envelope viruses tend to require direct contact with fresh body secretions for
transmission of infection, whereas tougher viruses will stay active on a surface for days or
weeks.
DNA
DNA is the double-stranded nucleic acid (deoxyribonucleic acid) that serves as the
blueprint for all proteins a cell can make. It enables the cell to live and function within a
body. It essentially amounts to instructions on how to make different proteins.
Messenger RNA
When it comes time to make a protein, a DNA segment unzips its double strands, allowing
messenger RNA to enter and bind. The messenger RNA forms a "negative" image of the
DNA segment it is “reading.” The messenger RNA then leaves the cell nucleus and travels
out into the cell's main body, where its message is read by cell structures called
ribosomes.
Transfer RNA is another type of RNA that floats around the cell. Each piece of transfer
RNA has only three base codes (as opposed to the messenger RNA, which has many
base codes and is a long strand). The piece of transfer RNA carries with it an amino acid
to which its code corresponds.
The ribosome looks like two round pieces attached together. The two pieces grab the
strand of messenger RNA and sandwich it between them. The ribosome reads the first
three codes on the messenger RNA and matches them to a piece of transfer RNA. It
moves to the next three codes and matches them as well. With each match, the transfer
RNA leaves its amino acid for the ribosome to bind to the next amino acid, so as the
ribosome moves down the strand of messenger RNA, it creates a strand of amino acids
based on the matching. As we know, a strand of amino acids forms a protein molecule.
This is how our cells make proteins.
Transcription
The act of messenger RNA taking down the protein code from the original DNA segment
is called transcription.
Translation
Translation is the act of producing a protein from the segment
of messenger RNA using transfer RNA. It is performed by the
ribosomes mentioned previously.
Viral Infections
When the match is correct, the virus binds to the cell and injects
its nucleic acids inside. There are several techniques that
viruses use to accomplish this, but all involve the capsid. Once
the viral particle has injected its nucleic acids into the host cell,
the next activity is to manufacture messenger RNA for the cell
to translate into protein. The proteins the viral nucleic acids
make will shut down the cell's normal function and convert the cell into a factory for viral
particle production.
Some viruses simply contain ready-made messenger RNA and they just inject it
into the host cell (like polio).
Some viruses inject a negative of the messenger RNA they need and include
with it an enzyme that will trick the host into making the usable messenger RNA
from the negative (like rabies).

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Basic Virology - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951458&ind=310&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Some viruses inject their DNA directly into the host cell. Messenger RNA is
made from this DNA, just as it would be made from host DNA (like poxviruses).
Regardless of the tricks the virus uses to make messenger RNA, once the messenger
RNA is made, the host cell is doomed. Ribosomes line up on the strand of messenger
RNA, read it, and use transfer RNA to mass produce the protein coded. This will be a viral
protein, and its action will be to shut down normal cell function and dedicate the cell to the
production of viral capsid and viral DNA.
Soon, the host cell is little more than a bag of viruses. These viral particles either bud off
the surface of the host cell or the host cell simply explodes, leaving millions of new viral
particles to seek new host cells. The only way to stop this process is for the immune
system to recognize the infected cell early and destroy it before virus production becomes
too advanced.
Infected cells express viral proteins, shapes that the immune system can recognize.
Within the body are several groups of cells, all created to respond against a specific
shape. For example, B lymphocytes, which live in our lymph nodes, transform into
antibody-producing plasma cells once they encounter their destined antigen. They
produce Y-shaped antibodies that flood the circulation and bind the viral antigen, thus
preventing the virus from attaching to the host cell, clumping with other antibody-virus
groupings to create a larger clump, which in turn attracts a cell called a macrophage. The
macrophage is the body's "Pac Man," swallowing and digesting debris.
Aside from antibodies, there are patrolling T-lymphocytes that identify viral or other
inappropriate shapes on the surfaces of host cells. The T-cell can thus recognize a virally
infected cell or even a cancer cell, attach, and destroy it before it causes harm.
Hopefully, between T-cell and antibody attack, the viral infection is removed from the body,
and the status quo resumes.
Related resources
Parvovirus: Vaccination and Prevention - October 16, 2024
Parvovirus in Dogs - April 9, 2024
Parvovirus: How it Happens - October 5, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Physical Illness and Treatment - June 24, 2023
Parvovirus: Caring for the Recovered Dog - May 10, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - November 10, 2021
Parvovirus: Disinfecting the Environment - You are being redirected to updated information on
this topic - September 30, 2015
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951458&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159506
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Basic Virology - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951458&ind=310&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:01 AM Basic Virology - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951458&ind=310&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Blastomyces yeast in budding stage, as seen
through a microscope. Photo courtesy of Michael
Harter, DVM, and VIN.
Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting
Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: November 20, 2019
Published: March 15, 2006
Blastomycosis, caused by Blastomyces
dermatitidis, is a systemic fungal infection that
affects dogs and cats. Blastomycosis is most
common in certain geographic areas in North
America, most often the Mississippi, Ohio,
Missouri, Tennessee, and St. Lawrence River
valleys, and in three provinces of Canada
(Quebec, Ontario, Manitoba). It has also been
reported in Africa, India, Europe, and Central
America. (Fungal growth is supported by wet,
sandy, acidic soils rich in organic matter, which is
why it is found in valleys and is seen most
frequently near water.)
Pathophysiology
Infection with Blastomyces occurs when a cat or dog inhales the fungal spores into the
lungs. The incubation period is from 5 to 12 weeks. Some animals don't show clinical
signs for a long time after being infected, but those animals are not contagious to other
animals and people. Blastomycosis organisms have a predilection for the respiratory tract,
and pulmonary disease is the most common sign (88-94% of canine cases). Once the
lung disease develops, yeast forms of the organism spread throughout the body. Organs
typically affected include eyes, bones, skin, lymph nodes, subcutaneous tissues, brain,
and testes. It can also be found in the nose, prostate, liver, mammary glands, and heart,
but those locations are less common.
Dogs appear to be much more susceptible to infection than other species. Although the
disease does occur in both people and cats, the incidence is much lower than in dogs.
Dogs are ten times more likely to contract the disease than are people, and 100 times
more likely than are cats. The incubation period in dogs is also shorter than in people. The
reason dogs are more susceptible is unknown, but immune-deficiency may play a role.
Annual prevalence in dogs in endemic areas is estimated at 1-2%. Many infected animals
live within 0.25 mile of water. An increased number of cases can occur after periods of
unusually heavy rainfall. Historically, young (i.e. 1-5 years), male, large-breed (e.g.
hounds, pointers) dogs have had the highest risk of infection. (This is probably because
these animals would tend to have more contact, due to hunting activities, with the
organism's geographical area.) However, any age, breed, or sex of dog can be infected.
Clinical Signs
The signs of illness will depend on what organs are infected. Some dogs will have eye
problems, and some will have neurological signs (seizures, head tilt, etc.). Lameness may
occur, if the infection is in the bones. Owners of dogs in the specific geographic areas

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952436&ind=311&objTypeID=1007 1/3
should watch for coughing, difficulty breathing, eye inflammation, enlarged testicles, fever,
swollen lymph nodes, ulcerated/draining skin lesions, bloody urine, difficulty urinating,
nasal cavity signs (including bloody nasal discharge), and lack of appetite. (Weight loss
occurs because of the decreased appetite.) Infections in the nasal passages may result in
skull damage, and lead to infection of the brain. Large skin abscesses and neurologic
signs are more common in cats than in dogs, while bone lesions are more common in
dogs than in cats. Hypercalcemia can occur in dogs, although it's rare in cats and nondomestic feline species.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis involves physical exam, blood tests, imaging (radiography, ultrasonography, CT,
etc.), urinalysis to look for Blastomyces yeast, cultures, serology, and biopsies of affected
organs. Fungal serology, to look for antibodies, is not always accurate and has been
known to produce false negatives. The enzyme immunoassay (EIA) for B. dermatitidis
galactomannan antigen appears to have a high sensitivity in urine (93.5%) and serum
(87%). The EIA assay is commercially available; cross reactions with Histoplasma
capsulatum, Coccidioides immitis, and Penicillium marneffei can occur with this assay.
The definitive diagnosis is finding the fungus in the tissues.
Treatment
Treatment involves various antifungal medications, including itraconazole, ketoconazole,
fluconazole, amphotericin B, and some combination therapies. These medications usually
need to be taken for a long period of time; how long depends on the specific case.
Treatment usually can be done at home, unless the disease is severe. Pets with
respiratory involvement should be on restricted activity. In severely ill dogs, intravenous
fluids, oxygen, antibiotics for secondary infections, and pain medication may be
necessary. Skin lesions may require wound cleaning and debridement.
Eyes that are severely affected may not respond well to the treatment because the
medication does not penetrate eyes very well. Ocular blastomycosis cases may need
systemic and topical corticosteroid therapy, topical anti-glaucoma medications, etc.
Significantly affected eyes may require enucleation (removal of the eyeball).
Pets with severe lung disease may get worse at the beginning of treatment because the
fungal organisms are dying; the mass death of organisms can cause severe respiratory
problems.
Patients may not appear to improve for one to two weeks after the start of treatment.
Close monitoring should be done for the first two weeks, and then rechecks are usually
scheduled on a monthly basis. Rechecks may involve blood tests, biochemistry profiles,
and imaging, if appropriate.
Prognosis
The prognosis for many pets is good, especially if owners can afford to treat the pet for
long enough. Approximately 50% to 75% of affected dogs recover when treated with
itraconazole, fluconazole, or an amphotericin-ketoconazole combination. Prognosis is
poor for dogs with severely affected lungs, but if the dog survives the first 7 to 10 days of
therapy, the prognosis improves. However, mortality rates in dogs with Blastomyces
dermatitidis can be as high as 41%.
The prognosis for the retention of vision, in animals that have eye disease, is variable.
Dogs with brain involvement often die. Seizures are common upon death of the organism
and may be uncontrollable.
Prognosis is also poor when at least 3 body systems are involved.

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952436&ind=311&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Relapses are most likely to occur in dogs that had a severe case at onset, or dogs that
were not treated long enough. Relapses are most common within the first 6 months after
treatment. Dogs that recover from the disease are probably not immune to getting it again.
After discontinuing therapy, animals may be rechecked at 1, 3, and 6 months for evidence
of relapse. In one study, relapse rates for itraconazole and fluconazole were 18% and
22%, respectively. Relapses are treated like a new infection.
There is no way to prevent your pets' exposure to Blastomyces other than by keeping
them away from affected geographic areas.
Zoonotic Potential
Blastomycosis is not considered to be a zoonotic disease. It is acquired by humans via
inhalation or direct contact with infective conidia/spores. Risk of infection is higher for
excavation workers, and for people working or playing in wooded areas with waterways.
Blastomycosis cannot be spread between dogs and other animals, or between dogs and
people. However, immunocompromised people should limit their contact with infected pets
and should wear gloves when cleaning and treating draining lesions.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952436&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159531
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Blastomycosis is a Systemic Fungal infection Affecting Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952436&ind=311&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Graphic courtesy MarVistaVet
Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 26, 2024
Published: April 03, 2004
Some blood-tinged droplets sneezed on the floor might be
the only sign, or there might be a steady, inexorable bloody
drip from one or both nostrils. These findings are alarming as
well as messy in the home and we want to identify the cause
and take care of it promptly if it is possible to do so. The
problem is that there are many causes, and not all of them
are localized to the nose, and many are very serious
diseases. The following is a review of tests typically
necessary to get to the bottom of the bloody nose as well as
the conditions that might be responsible.
First Aid
So, you are at home with your pet and a bloody nose starts
and does not seem to be stopping. Here are some tips to get the bleeding controlled in the
time prior to your vet appointment:
Keep yourself calm. If your pet sees you getting frantic, they will, too.
Excitement = higher blood pressure = more bleeding.
Get an ice pack and apply it to the bridge of the nose (obviously, be sure your
pet can breathe around the ice pack). The cold will constrict small blood
vessels, which will slow the bleeding.
Do not insert absorbent material or cotton swabs in the pet's nose, as this will
generate sneezing, which will make the bleeding worse. A dose of
an oxymetazoline nasal spray such as Afrin may help constrict blood vessels
and lead to relief.
If the pet has a condition that involves recurring nose bleeds, consider the oral
use of the Chinese herb Yunnan Baiyo, which promotes blood clotting tendency.
Ask your veterinarian for details.
If these steps do not stop the bleeding or the pet is having difficulty breathing, go
to your vet's office or local emergency clinic at once.
Don't forget that a pet with a bloody nose will likely swallow a great deal of the
draining blood. This may lead to an especially black stool or even vomit with
blood clots in it.
After a bloody nose, such findings are usually just a reflection of the bloody nose
and do not necessarily indicate bleeding in the GI tract.
Information Your Veterinarian Will Need

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 1/6
You can help your veterinarian tremendously by taking some time to think about the
following information and bringing up anything pertinent.
Does your pet take medication? Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory medications
(aspirin in particular) will inactivate blood clotting factors. Do not assume your
vet knows all the medications your pet is taking; list them for your vet.
Do you have any rat poison or has your pet been consuming any dead rodents
that might have been poisoned? Most rat poisons act by disabling the ability to
clot blood.
Look closely at your pet's face. Is there any deformity or asymmetry? Is the
bridge of the nose swollen? Are either of the third eyelids elevated? Does one
eye seem to protrude more. does one eye tear more? Does the nose leather
(textured tip) look normal?
Could there have been any trauma to the nose? Does your pet play roughly
with another animal?
Is your pet exposed to foxtails or other grass awns that could become lodged in
the nose?
Has your pet been sneezing? Has the pet been rubbing at the nose?
Open your pet's mouth if possible. Look at the gums under the lips. Is there
blood in the mouth? Do the gums seem pale? If they are, this suggests a
serious loss of blood and you may have an emergency on your hands.
Is there any evidence of bleeding anywhere besides the nose? You may see a
black tarry stool with Intestinal bleeding may present with a black tarry stool.
Any unusual bruising should be reported. Any unexplained swelling that
might be bleeding under the skin should also be noted.
Is this the first nosebleed or have there been others?
Is the blood coming from both nostrils or only one?
Where to Start
After the veterinarian performs a general examination of your pet, some more specific
tests are needed with the idea of prioritizing the most likely conditions and least invasive
forms of testing.
Blood Tests First
A basic blood panel and urinalysis will probably be needed as a database for the animal’s
health as well as to assess the degree of blood loss. This information also serves as a
pre-anesthetic evaluation should rhinoscopy or nasal imaging become necessary. A
platelet (a blood cell involved in blood clotting) count will be needed as will coagulation
tests (common tests are the PT or prothrombin time; the PTT or partial thromboplastin
time; the ACT or activated clotting time; and the buccal bleeding or symplate time.) These
tests evaluate a complicated biochemical cascade responsible for clotting blood. The
pattern of abnormalities found in these tests will sort out blood clotting disorders.

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Other blood tests that may be helpful involve titers for fungal infections, a classic cause of
the nosebleed. Fungi are inhaled and if the patient is immune-compromised or
excessively exposed, the fungus can take root and begin to grow in the nasal cavity.
In cats, the most common nasal fungal infection is caused by Cryptococcus neoformans.
The good news here is that a blood test for fungal antigen is very accurate. Any positive
number is significant and warrants treatment.
In dogs, fungal infections are not so simple. The most common organisms are Aspergillus
fumigatus and Penicillium species. Blood tests are not as accurate especially since there
are other species of Aspergillus besides fumigatus and each requires its own blood test.
Complicating matters is the fact that nasal tumors predispose a dog to fungal infections so
a dog can easily have both problems in the same nose. Blood tests for fungal infections
may be included in the initial battery of tests. A negative Aspergillus test does not rule out
Aspergillus infection.
Blastomyces dermatitidis is another fungus that can get into a dog's nose. Urine antigen
testing is accurate for diagnosis and blood testing is also available if results are
ambiguous. As with other fungi, treatment is long term and challenging.
Another condition worth mentioning is hyperviscosity syndrome. In this situation, an
extremely high blood protein level makes the blood so thick that blood vessels break from
the pressure. Certain types of cancer (multiple myeloma, lymphoma, and certain types of
leukemia) as well as infection with Ehrlichia canis, a blood parasite can cause this
syndrome.
A routine blood panel should show the unusual globulin levels that typify hyperviscosity
syndrome.
Another relatively simple parameter to measure is blood pressure. High blood
pressure can occur as a complication of numerous diseases. When blood pressure rises,
small blood vessels begin to burst and bleed, not just in the nose but often in the eyes or
nervous system as well. Do not be surprised if your veterinarian checks for retinal
hemorrhage.
Tick-borne infections (Ehrlichia, Babesia, and others) commonly involve low platelet
counts. Platelets are blood cells involved in clotting and when they become infected with
blood parasites, they do not work properly in the clotting cascade. Tick panels are blood
panels that screen for infection with numerous tick-borne parasites, most of which can be
managed or eradicated with antibiotics.
The bottom line is that there are many causes of nose bleeds but many can be ruled out
with non-invasive testing and it is the non-invasive tests that we want to perform first.
Blood Clotting Disorders of Pets
Rat poisoning
Von Willebrand's disease
Hemophilia
Liver failure
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Diseases Causing a Low Platelet Count
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
Anaplasma infection
Bone marrow disease
Drug reactions (methimazole, chemotherapy drugs, excess estrogens, sulfa
class antibiotics)
Feline leukemia virus infection

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Radiograph from a dog with a nasal tumor. The left side
of the nasal cavity appears darker because the tumor has
destroyed much of the fine bone quality. The right side of
the nasal cavity still has its delicate bone structure which
appears as an almost lacy texture. Photo courtesy
MarVistaVet
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
Ehrlichia infection (dogs)
Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Hemangiosarcoma
Other cancers
Babesia
Cruising Towards Anesthesia
If the basic blood tests and clotting parameters are normal, then the chances are that the
problem is localized to the nose but there are a few more tests that are required before
the patient is anesthetized for a nasal examination.
Radiographs of the chest should be performed to rule out obvious cancer
spread or obvious disseminated fungal disease.
An oral examination should be performed as best as possible. Dental disease
can be bad enough to create nasal bleeding, given that the roots of larger teeth
connect with the nasal cavity. Oral tumors that have eroded into the nasal
cavity may be evident if one can get a good look in the mouth. Many patients
will not allow much oral exam and certainly probing the gums and getting a
thorough inspection will require anesthesia but it is absolutely worth looking for
obvious lesions if it is possible to do so.
Diagnostics Requiring General Anesthesia
If nothing has been revealed by the
preceding tests, it is now time for
radiographs of the nose, superficial
rhinoscopy, and a dental inspection all of
which require general anesthesia.
Radiographs generally start the procedure
as the other procedures might alter the
radiographic appearance of tissues. The
radiographs help evaluate the tooth roots
and sinuses. Nasal tumors are common
causes of nosebleeds in elderly dogs and
the bone destruction they cause is evident
on radiographs. Referral for more advanced
imaging such as CT scanning or MRI, may
be needed to determine the extent of bone
destruction or to clarify radiography findings.
An otoscope (the same gadget used to look
in your pet’s ears) can be used to look inside
the nasal cavity superficially to remove
foreign bodies lodged there. Deeper peeking
requires an actual endoscope which may not be readily available in general practice.
The teeth can be cleaned under anesthesia with specific attention to the tooth roots
(remember, an abscessed upper tooth root penetrates into the nasal sinus above.
If it seems appropriate to do so, some nasal discharge can be flushed through the nose
and into a gauze sponge packing the throat. This may be helpful in identifying infectious
organisms but may initiate more bleeding so some judgment is required on whether the
benefit is worth the risk.
Then What?

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 4/6
If the simple tools of general practice do not reveal adequate information, referral for
endoscopy may be needed. Deeper visualization of the nasal tissues is possible with this
equipment, plus biopsy specimens can be taken although bleeding is the chief risk. Taking
a biopsy is particularly difficult in the nose, not just because of the hemorrhage but
because nasal tumors are surrounded by so much inflammation it is difficult to get a
representative sample. Often it is not possible to see the area being biopsied directly,
especially if prior sampling has led to bleeding.
If radiographs are diagnostic for cancer and aggressive therapy is contemplated,
prognosis is highly dependent on the type of tumor so biopsy becomes especially
important in this situation.
And Then What?
At the end of all these procedures, sometimes the area of bleeding is simply not
accessible without surgery. This would be the final and most invasive procedure in
retrieving a difficult foreign body or tissue sample. Extensive bleeding is expected and this
is generally the last resort after a long road of diagnostics.
In a study by Bissett et al published in the December 15, 2007, issue of the Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association, 176 cases of dogs with bloody noses were
reviewed to determine which underlying causes were most common. Of these 176 dogs, a
definite underlying cause was found in 115 cases.
30% had nasal tumors
29% had trauma
17% had nasal inflammation of unknown cause (idiopathic rhinitis)
10% had low platelets
3% had some other blood clotting abnormality
2% had high blood pressure
2% had tooth abscess
Conspicuously absent is the nasal fungal infection but since these are frequently regional
in nature in dogs, the population studied may not have been in an area where fungi are
common pathogens.
Other Relevant Studies
Evaluation of factors associated with survival in dogs with untreated nasal carcinoma: 139
cases (1993-2003) by Rassnick et al published in the Journal of the American Veterinary
Medical Association 229:401-406, 2006.
This study reviewed the outcomes of 139 dogs diagnosed with nasal carcinoma. Since
many dogs are euthanized at the time of this diagnosis, this study included only dogs that
were alive seven days after the initial diagnosis was made. Dogs studied received only
pain medication, anti-inflammatories and antibiotics (no surgery, chemotherapy or
radiation therapy). The following statistical findings came out:
80% of dogs were purebred. The median age was 11 years and the median
body weight was 48 lbs.
77% had nose bleeds. Median survival time for dogs with nosebleeds was 88
days vs. 224 days for dogs with carcinomas that did not have nose bleeds.
Approximately half of the patients studied were felt to have improvement with
the supportive care described above.
Ultimately, the therapy for a recurring nosebleed depends on the cause, and the causes
are many and varied. If your pet has a nose bleed that lasts more than 5 minutes, seek
veterinary care right away. If nose bleeds are recurrent, your pet will need a medical

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 5/6
checkup to sort out the possible causes, as reviewed above. Contact your veterinarian to
assess your pet's situation as early in the course of disease as possible.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952051&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159553
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:02 AM Bloody Nose (Epistaxis) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952051&ind=312&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Brucellosis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 13, 2024
Published: November 13, 2006
Brucellosis is an important venereal disease in
many species. It does not usually come up in
pet ownership because most pet dogs are not
bred. Once someone decides to breed their
dog, though, they should know all about this
disease, particularly since it can be
transmitted to humans.
All dogs to be bred should have a
brucellosis test. Active stud dogs should
be tested every 6 months.
If you are planning to breed your dog, test
your dog and insist that the owner of your
dog's mate produce results of a recent test for
your inspection.
Which Type of Brucella
There are ten species of Brucella and while Brucella canis is of most concern for
dogs. Dogs can certainly become infected with Brucella abortus from cattle; Brucella
melitensis from goats; and Brucella suis from pigs if they are allowed to drink
contaminated milk or eat leftover birth membranes, contaminated meat, or aborted
young. Other Brucella species are Brucella ovis, which affects only rams, Brucella
neotomae, which affects desert mice, Brucella microti which affects rodents and voles,
Brucella ceti and Brucella pinnipedialis, which affect marine mammals, and Brucella
inopinata, which has only been found once in a human breast implant infection. Luckily for
people, Brucella canis causes much less serious disease in humans than the livestock
Brucella but the health department still considers any Brucella infection reportable.
How Dogs get Infected
Dogs like to stick their noses in all sorts of nasty places. They also chew up all sorts of
disgusting things. Brucellosis can be contracted sexually, but it can also be contracted by
inhalation (sniffing contaminated urine or fetal membranes), through the eyes, or orally
(licking contaminated urine or urogenital secretions or chewing up fetal membranes).
Urine and saliva from an infected dog are not nearly as rife with organisms as urogenital
secretions; it is when breeding and/or whelping is in the picture that the transmission risk
becomes high.
When a female dog aborts a pregnancy because of a Brucella infection, she continues to
secrete fluids packed with Brucella bacteria for four to six weeks.
Brucella organisms are able to survive in the environment for months if conditions are
moist, cool, and dark. Bleach is an effective disinfectant in the environment.

8/3/25, 12:03 AM Brucellosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952554&ind=314&objTypeID=1007 1/4
What Happens After Infection?
The organism requires three weeks on average to become evident in the bloodstream.
After that, it localizes in the reproductive or urinary tract and either continuously or
periodically seeds the bloodstream from there. Lymph nodes can enlarge and possibly the
spleen or liver can become inflamed but generally the infected adult dog does not seem
sick in the short term. Chronic disease from long-term immune stimulation can result.
Diseases produced by long-term inflammation can include:
Diskospondylitis (inflammation of a disk in the spine)
Uveitis (deep eye inflammation)
Multiple joint arthritis
Glomerulonephritis (kidney inflammation and protein loss)
Most of the time, the only sign is aborted pregnancy between the 45 and 59 day of
pregnancy (relatively late in the pregnancy). Classically, the aborted pups appear to have
died at least several days prior to abortion as they do not look freshly dead. Abortion does
not always appear in this most common form, though. Sometimes, the pregnancy is lost
so early in its course that the problem is mistaken for infertility. Sometimes, puppies are
stillborn. Sometimes, they are born live and infected.
Testing
Direct culture of the organism from a dead puppy, infected dog’s blood or from secretion is
confirmatory but the organism is difficult to isolate in this way. This means we usually
depend on immunologic tests. Which test is selected depends on what the test is being
used for.
Screening before Breeding
The RSAT (rapid slide agglutination test) is a test that can readily identify negative dogs.
That is, if the test comes out negative, the dog can be considered negative. If the test
comes out positive, further testing is needed. Up to 60% false positives occur. A test kit is
available inside the veterinary hospital and some facilities can perform this test while you
wait.
The IFA (Immunofluorescent Antibody) test is a similar screening test, but it must be sent
to the reference laboratory. The same guidelines apply negative means negative, and
positive means do further tests. That said, if there is a classic history (such as an aborted
litter of puppies) along with a positive IFA test, it may not be necessary to do further
testing, as the situation is clear.
Further Testing for RSAT or IFA Positive Dogs
There are two tests that fit in this category. The most specific test (meaning the most
trustworthy positive value) is the AGID (agar gel immunodiffusion) test. A version of the
test called the CPAGID, named for the bacterial protein it detects, is the most accurate of
all.
Another test is called a TAT (tube agglutination test). It looks for antibodies against
Brucella canis. Antibiotic treatment with tetracyclines can drop antibody levels low enough
for the TAT to be negative but this does not necessarily indicate that the infection has
cleared. At this time the CPAGID is favored over TAT.
If a dog is to travel to Australia, a TAT test is required as part of the travel
documentation. If a dog is to travel to New Zealand, an AGID test is required as
part of the travel documentation.
Treatment
th th

8/3/25, 12:03 AM Brucellosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952554&ind=314&objTypeID=1007 2/4
First and foremost, the dog in question must be removed from the breeding program by
either spay/neuter or euthanasia. The dog can remain as a pet but probably should not be
sold due to potential health risks to potential buyers.
If the dog is to remain as a pet, there are several considerations that must be observed:
1) BRUCELLOSIS IS CONSIDERED TO BE A PERMANENT INFECTION! This means
that precautions against human exposure must be maintained for the life of the animal.
2) The dog should be confined to the owner's property for life. This means that veterinary
services should be provided by a house call veterinary service and grooming services
should be provided by a mobile service. Obviously, these service providers should be
warned about the dog's condition so that proper protective gear can be employed.
3) The dog can NEVER have contact with pregnant women, children, elderly people,
people on chemotherapy or anyone considered to have a compromised immune system.
Most human cases are mild and flu-like, but certain "at risk" human populations can have
more serious consequences.
4) No exposure to any other dogs. All body secretions of an infected dog and contagious.
5) The infected dog will need to be on antibiotics (see below) as long as tests are positive.
Ideally, testing (such as gel immunodiffusion) should be done monthly. Antibiotics can be
discontinued as long as tests are negative but they will invariably become positive again
eventually necessitating more antibiotics.
ANTIBIOTIC TREATMENTS
Tetracycline and Streptomycin
In this regimen, tetracycline is given twice daily for a month, and injectable streptomycin is
given daily for the first and last week of the month. In one study, over half the dogs were
considered cured with this regimen, but currently, streptomycin is difficult to come by (as it
is considered old-fashioned and has few uses at this time).
Minocycline and Streptomycin
Minocycline and doxycycline are derivatives of tetracycline that can also be used to treat
brucellosis, but neither is effective when used alone. Again, four weeks of treatment is
needed. Minocycline is used once daily while the aminoglycoside is used daily during the
first and last week.
Lack of availability of streptomycin has been a problem in treating this condition.
Aminoglycosides such as gentamycin have been proposed as substitutes but they are not
as effective. Quinolone antibiotics such as enrofloxacin have also been proposed as
substitutes, and are much less toxic than aminoglycosides; they may emerge as the best
replacement for streptomycin.
Doxycycline and an Aminoglycoside
This regimen requires daily injections of the aminoglycoside antibiotic for the first and last
weeks of a four-week course of treatment. The aminoglycosides are a class of antibiotics
that has some very real negative effects on the kidney and so a longer course is not
without risk. Monitoring may be needed. Newer literature suggests replacing the
aminoglycoside with rifampin.
Because of the potential for human exposure, euthanasia has been encouraged
for dogs confirmed to be positive. In some states, euthanasia of positive dogs is
mandatory. If you choose to keep a positive dog for a pet, see the links below to
minimize contact with infected body fluids.

8/3/25, 12:03 AM Brucellosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952554&ind=314&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Keeping Brucella Out of the Kennel
A new dog for a breeding kennel should be isolated for one month. Two Brucella tests two
to three months apart should be adequate to confirm negativity (it takes 8-12 weeks from
infection for tests to turn positive).
If an infection is detected in a kennel, the entire kennel population should be evaluated
and re-screened every 3 months. The kennel should be quarantined until all dogs
have tested negative three times with 3 months between tests. Positive dogs should be
removed from the kennel.
Links
If you are living with a positive dog, the potential for human disease is always there. Here
are some links to help in that situation.
US Dept. of Agriculture (USDA)
National Association of State Public Health Veterinarians
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952554&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159603
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:03 AM Brucellosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952554&ind=314&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Canine Heartworms and Preventing Disease
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, MS, PhD, DACVIM (Internal Medicine and Cardiology)
Revised: March 25, 2025
Published: February 20, 2024
Canine heartworms, Dirofilaria immitis, are parasitic worms that pose a serious threat to
dogs. These long, slender worms live in the pulmonary arteries (and, occasionally, within
the heart) of dogs and can measure up to a foot in length! They can cause substantial
damage to the lungs and heart.
Adult heartworms cause inflammation of
the blood vessels in the lungs, causing
respiratory issues and pulmonary
hypertension (increased blood pressure in
the lungs' vessels). In some cases, this
leads to weight loss, weakness, rightsided congestive heart failure, reduced
quality of life, and even death.
The prevention of heartworms and
early detection are crucial in
managing heartworm disease.
Mosquitoes and the Heartworm Lifecycle
Mosquitos are vectors of heartworm
disease. A vector is a carrier and
transmitter of a disease from an infected
individual to a non-infected individual.
Certain species of mosquito can ingest
young heartworms, called microfilariae
when they feed on an infected animal.
Once inside the mosquito, the
microfilariae develop into third-stage
larvae (known as L3) over a few weeks,
provided that the environmental
conditions are conducive (temperatures
above 58 F). The larvae pass through the
puncture wound the mosquito makes
when it bites another animal.
The larvae grow under the skin of the
newly infected animal over several weeks,
progressing through additional larval
stages. At a certain point, the larvae enter
the bloodstream and float into the
pulmonary arteries (the arteries carrying
o

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Canine Heartworms and Preventing Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11942142&ind=315&objTypeID=1007 1/3
blood from the heart to the lungs). Here, they mature into adults. It takes about six to
seven months for the larvae to reach adulthood. Adult heartworms mate, and then the
females begin to release tiny larvae, the microfilariae, back into the bloodstream,
continuing their lifecycle.
Prevention is Key
Preventing heartworms is much easier (especially for your dog) than having to treat an
active heartworm infection.
Studies show that exposure to heartworm depends on factors including:
The presence of wild canine populations (foxes, coyotes, wolves) in the
surrounding area can continue the spread of heartworm
Regional differences in climate and ecosystems (elevation, humidity, rainfall,
temperature)
The Prevalence of Heartworms Around the World
Heartworms exist in many parts of the world, but their prevalence greatly varies. In
warmer climates with larger mosquito populations, such as tropical and subtropical areas,
the risk of heartworm transmission is higher. These areas make excellent habitats for
mosquitoes and the development of heartworm larvae, so dogs living in these regions are
at a greater risk of heartworms. On the other hand, there are fewer heartworm infections
in cooler or drier regions with smaller mosquito populations.
The travel, relocation, and presence of infected animals can allow heartworms to start
infecting animals where they are less common. Climate change (and temperature
increase) is also expanding mosquito ranges, creating longer active seasons and better
environmental conditions for their larvae.
Environmental Considerations
More recent recommendations for
preventing heartworm infections advise
reducing mosquito bites. This can be done
by avoiding places with heavy mosquito
populations when possible to reduce the
chances of being bitten and contracting
heartworms. For example, some studies
have shown that indoor dogs in high-risk
areas tend to have fewer infections than
outdoor dogs.
Avoid visiting permanent and seasonal bodies of water like lakes, streams, and floodplain
areas with your dog, especially when large mosquito hatches are taking place (usually in
warmer, humid weather). Check around your home for areas with standing water and get
rid of containers or reservoirs that may be prime real estate for mosquito larvae.
Depending on where you live, it may always be an ideal climate for mosquitoes, and other
preventative methods such as lawn alteration, porch nets, and other mosquito barriers
may be helpful. Talk to your local health department if you have concerns about
mosquitoes on your property and what you can do to help control them.
Preventative Medications
Heartworm preventatives are prescribed by your veterinarian and come in oral, topical,
and injectable forms. As mentioned before, preventing heartworms is much easier than
treating them, and the American Heartworm Society recommends FDA-approved
heartworm preventatives year-round.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Canine Heartworms and Preventing Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11942142&ind=315&objTypeID=1007 2/3
In areas where mosquitoes are endemic or native to the area, your dog can be infected if
just one preventative dose is missed. The risk varies depending on your location, and
even people who live in places with cold winters should give heartworm preventatives
year-round for the best possible prevention.
Detecting Heartworm Infection
Blood tests for heartworm infections are recommended yearly for all dogs over seven
months. If you do not give preventatives regularly every month or if you switch
preventatives, more frequent testing may be recommended. If your dog has tested
positive for heartworms, your veterinarian will discuss the treatment options available.
Talk to your veterinarian about heartworm preventative options and recommended testing
frequency to keep your dog as protected as possible.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11942142&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159635
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Canine Heartworms and Preventing Disease - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11942142&ind=315&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Skin lesions near a grey cat's tail.
Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Revised: July 19, 2023
Published: July 19, 2023
Cellulitis is a painful inflammation of the tissue
under the skin. In animals, it is generally caused by
a bacterial infection that has entered the skin from a
cut, open wound, or broken skin from an animal
bite.
The most common bacteria causing cellulitis are
Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. These bacteria
are found in your pets’ environment (in the soil,
water, and air), on humans and other animals, and
are known opportunists. An open wound is a perfect
environment for bacteria to thrive.
You may have heard infections caused by these bacteria referred to as “staph” or “strep.”
It is extremely important to seek your veterinarian’s help as quickly as possible if you
suspect a wound has become infected. If left untreated, cellulitis can quickly become very
serious, sometimes resulting in the tissues becoming necrotic (tissue death), and can be
fatal to your pet in severe cases.
Symptoms
Cellulitis can occur on any part of your dog's or cat’s body where there is a break in the
skin, allowing bacteria to enter. For this reason, cellulitis is often the secondary health
issue, the first being the wound that breaks the skin. A wound does not always need to be
large for bacteria to enter and may go unnoticed until the symptoms of cellulitis appear.
In the affected area, your pet may have:
sensitivity and pain;
skin that feels hot to the touch, redness;
an abscess;
accumulated pus or green discharge;
swelling;
obsessive licking of the area.
The infection may cause your pet to have a fever, refuse to eat, act lethargic, or appear
depressed. You may notice an unpleasant odor if there is an abscess or discharge. Often,
this odor is the first clue that something is going on with your pet if you are unaware that
they have been injured.
Treatment
Your veterinarian will take your pet’s history and examine them for wounds or abscesses.
Blood tests and cultures may be needed to determine the type of bacteria in your pet’s
body and their overall health.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11604956&ind=316&objTypeID=1007 1/2
If an abscess is found and hasn’t already burst, it will be opened, drained, and cleaned,
usually under anesthesia or sedation. A piece of sterile tubing, cloth, or other material is
often placed into the abscess to allow continued drainage. Stitches may be used to keep
this drain in place, and drains are often covered with a bandage.
A lab test may be performed on the fluid from the abscess to identify further the culprit or
culprits causing the infection. This is important to ensure that the correct antibiotics are
prescribed. Culture results can take several days to return, and a change in antibiotics
may be needed. Your pet may have other issues stemming from the original injury, which
will be treated as needed.
Your veterinarian will send you home with antibiotics to tackle the infection, possibly antiinflammatories, and pain medication as needed. Based on culture results, antibiotic
therapy can be tailored to your pet’s specific needs, and multiple antibiotics are
sometimes needed. Additionally, topical antibiotic ointments are available. You will likely
be given a list of aftercare instructions, which may suggest the continued use of warm
compresses on the abscess site to encourage drainage. Use a protective e-collar if your
pet won’t leave the treated area alone. These cones are available at your veterinary clinic
or a pet or feed store.
Be sure to finish the prescription medications as directed.
Sometimes, the drain is not enough, and the abscess fills up again despite your best
efforts. Contact your veterinarian if this happens.
Should You Be Concerned About Catching This from Your Pet?
Always wash your hands well before and after treating your pet, and wear gloves if
possible. If your immune system is compromised, let your veterinarian know, and pay
special attention to hygiene when dealing with your pet’s wound.
Prognosis
Your veterinarian is your best source for information and treatment and for receiving a
positive outcome when dealing with cellulitis.
In minor cases and with proper and timely care, your pet should recover without problems.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11604956&pid=19239
a2d008a4-c698-4d77-8e86-e8312589b83c.1754159658
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Cellulitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11604956&ind=316&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Kissing bug Triatoma
Photo courtesy of CDC and WHO
Chagas Disease in Dogs
Asiya Bhaisaheb, Veterinary Student Class of 2025
Reviewed by the Veterinary Team at VIN
Published: August 16, 2022
Chagas disease is an infectious disease caused by a microscopic parasite called
Trypanosoma cruzi. This parasite cannot infect mammals on its own and instead is spread
by an insect called the kissing bug, or, more formally, the triatomine. Kissing bugs spread
the parasites through their feces. If the bug bites a dog and then defecates nearby,
parasites can infect the dog through the open wound from the bite. Dogs can also be
infected by eating kissing bugs, as the parasites enter the body through mucous
membranes like the gums.
Once the parasite infects an animal, if it is not
treated promptly, it can reproduce and live in the
body for the rest of the animal's life. Chagas has
been a serious problem in humans and dogs in
South America for many years, but recently there
have also been cases reported in the southern
United States.
Signs of Infection
Chagas has three stages after the animal has been
infected: acute, latent, and chronic.
Acute Phase
During the acute phase, the parasite enters the
dog's body and begins to infect macrophages, a
type of white blood cell. Macrophages normally
travel all through the body to fight infection and the
parasite, hidden inside these cells, can move about
undetected. When it reaches the heart, it begins to
multiply and damage heart cells. The parasite can
also infect many other body systems, including the
nervous system, liver, kidneys, spleen, or lymph
nodes. 
Most animals only have mild symptoms at this
stage, such as slight fever or low energy, although
dogs younger than six months are more likely to be severely affected. This stage generally
lasts for several weeks and throughout this time, there are many parasites in the blood
and tissues. Unfortunately, due to the lack of visible symptoms, acute phase infections of
Chagas are often missed. As a patient's immune system begins to fight the parasites, the
number of parasites in the body goes down and the patient moves into the next phase of
infection.
Latent Phase

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Chagas Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11081954&ind=317&objTypeID=1007 1/4
During the latent phase, there are few parasites in the blood and the patient has no
symptoms of illness. The immune system is generally not able to fully eliminate all the
parasites in the body, but it keeps levels low enough that the patient doesn't feel sick. A
Chagas infection at this stage is difficult to identify through laboratory testing because
there are so few parasites in the blood. Some dogs may remain in the latent phase for the
rest of their lives and will thus continue on without any symptoms.
Chronic Phase
Other dogs, however, will go on to the chronic phase of infection. We are not yet sure
what triggers the chronic phase in some animals, but if the immune system becomes
compromised through other diseases or injury, it can allow parasites to replicate again. As
the immune system tries to fight against the growing number of parasites, it causes
inflammation throughout the body, which can make the dog feel even sicker. Along with
signs of systemic infection, like fever and lethargy, we also see symptoms of heart
disease such as weakness, collapse, and, in severe cases, sudden death.
Diagnosis
Because Chagas disease is still relatively unknown in the United States, many cases are
missed even after symptoms set in. Ask yourself the following questions to see if your pet
is likely to have contracted Chagas:
Do they currently live or have they ever lived in areas where Chagas disease is
common? Infections are widespread in Texas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Georgia,
and Tennessee, but have been reported all through the southern United
States.
Does your dog have symptoms of heart disease, such as lethargy, weakness,
collapse, or labored breathing? Or do they have symptoms of systemic
disease, like fever or loss of appetite?
Does your dog spend a lot of time outdoors, such as in a kennel, dog house, or
as a working dog? Kissing bugs do not commonly live inside homes in the
United States, but they can be found outside.
If your dog fits any of the above criteria and your veterinarian suspects Chagas, they may
take a blood sample to send to a laboratory for molecular tests or to look at under a
microscope. They may also take X-rays or use ultrasound to look at your dog's heart.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Chagas Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11081954&ind=317&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Busselman R. (2022) Figure 3: Triatomines of 11 species occur across the southern United States [map]. In
Busselman R. Chagas Disease Ecology in the United States: Recent Advances in Understanding Trypanosoma
cruzi Transmission Among Triatomines, Wildlife, and Domestic Animals and a Quantitative Synthesis of
Vector-Host Interactions. Annual review of animal biosciences 10, 325–348.
Treatment
Drugs are available to fight the parasite infection and are quite effective during the acute
phase. However, once the dog is in the chronic stage, it is no longer effective to only kill
the parasites. Instead, the focus is on managing the symptoms of heart disease. Your
veterinarian may recommend heart medications, prescription diets, or changes in exercise
level.
Chagas Disease In Other Species
Although Chagas is also a serious condition in humans, your risk of contracting it from
your dog is extremely low. You cannot get Chagas by being bitten or licked by an infected
dog. The main risk to humans from dogs is for those who are handling infected blood
samples, such as veterinary or laboratory staff.
Chagas has been seen in both domestic cats and wild cats, such as bobcats. However, it
appears to be less common in cats than it is in dogs. Research on the disease in cats is
minimal, but if your cat is showing symptoms of heart disease, promptly inform your
veterinarian.
Prevention
Research is being done on a canine vaccine for Chagas, but as of right now, it is not
commercially available. Even if it were available, it only provides partial protection. If you
live in an area where Chagas has been reported, you can take the following steps to
protect your pets:
Do not allow your pets to interact with or eat meat from other species that might
be infected (raccoons, opossums, armadillos, rodents and skunks). Your dog
can contract Chagas by ingesting kissing bugs that are on these other
animals.
Regularly spray outdoor kennels and spaces with pyrethrin/permethrin
insecticides, which are effective against kissing bugs.
Before breeding female dogs, screen them for Chagas because it can be
passed down to offspring.
Note that pyrethrin insecticides are toxic to cats in high doses. Spray insecticides are
1-5% pyrethrin, while most cats have symptoms of poisoning at concentrations
around 40%, so pyrethrin sprays intended to be used outside are generally safe even
if you have cats. Be sure to check the concentration of pyrethrin in the product you
are using, store the container where cats can't access it and allow insecticides to dry
fully before allowing cats to enter that space. Never apply a pyrethrin product directly
to a cat.
Being informed of the risk factors and symptoms of Chagas disease is the best way to
ensure that your pets receive timely care. The earlier you catch the infection, the better
your chances of reducing long-term complications.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11081954&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159681

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Chagas Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11081954&ind=317&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:04 AM Chagas Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11081954&ind=317&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Illustration by MarVistaVet
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor
Contagious
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA); Brendan C. McKiernan, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: February 24, 2022
Published: September 27, 2010
Definition and Causes
Chronic bronchitis is usually a non-infectious, inflammatory condition affecting the lining
(mucosa) of the large airways (the trachea and bronchi) that results in a cough on most
days for more than two months. In most cases, the specific cause of chronic bronchitis in
dogs is not identified. Chronic bronchitis is neither infectious nor contagious to other
dogs; dogs will not pass it on to other dogs as they can in the acute form (see below).
Acute bronchitis, on the other hand, is most often caused by infectious agents, such as
viruses (e.g. parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, canine influenza virus, distemper virus, or
bacterial agents Bordetella bronchiseptica is the most common). It is commonly termed
kennel cough or canine infectious tracheobronchitis. Inflammation can also be caused by
noxious irritants such as second hand smoke, foreign bodies, allergens (similar to hay
fever in humans), foods allergens, and either migrating or primary lung parasites. In many
of these cases, this acute bronchitis, occurring at the time of the infection or insult, will
resolve with appropriate therapy from your veterinarian. However, if the bronchitis
persists long enough – generally, more than a few months – it is labeled chronic, and the
cough itself can begin to cause and perpetuate airway inflammation.
Clinical Signs
Dogs with chronic bronchitis generally have a persistent
hacking cough. Some people describe it as sounding
like a goose honking. However, any trachea-bronchial
inflammation/irritation can produce a similar sounding
cough. Often, the coughing occurs during the night or
when the dog first starts to move around upon waking. It
also commonly occurs with excitement or exercise.
Diagnosis
Chronic bronchitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Other diseases can cause clinical signs
similar to chronic bronchitis. These include tracheal collapse, laryngeal paralysis, lung
diseases, lung cancer, heart failure, heartworm disease and infectious causes of acute
bronchitis (listed above). Your veterinarian will likely attempt to rule out many of these
causes with a history, physical examination, and additional testing.
Diagnostic tests that are used to establish a diagnosis of chronic bronchitis include chest
x-rays (thoracic radiographs), airway endoscopy (passing a small camera into the larynx,
trachea and bronchi), collecting samples from the lower airways for culture and analysis of
the cells in the airways (broncho-alveolar lavage or a transtracheal washing), and
sometimes even echocardiography (examining the heart using ultrasound). A fecal
analysis might be needed to rule out parasites.

8/3/25, 12:05 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952974&ind=318&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Treatment
Once a diagnosis of chronic bronchitis is made, your veterinarian will generally treat this
condition with a variety of medications.
There are several things to remember about treating chronic bronchitis:
The cough in chronic bronchitis is unlikely to completely disappear. The aim is
to reduce the coughing by more than 70-80%, and to reduce the severity of the
coughing fits.
Coughing begets coughing – the more a dog coughs, the more they irritate their
airways, which stimulates more coughing. Therefore, the aim is to initially
break the coughing cycle.
Treatment of chronic bronchitis generally relies on using a combination of medications:
Corticosteroids. These drugs are the main therapy for chronic bronchitis. They
reduce and suppress the inflammation in the airways. They can be given orally
(pills) or with an inhaler. Specific canine inhalers are required to properly
administer steroids.
Certain antibiotics, such as doxycycline, minocycline, or azithromycin may be
given to rule out common infectious agents of the airways. These particular
antibiotics also have an anti-inflammatory effect, and may decrease coughing
even if there aren't any infectious agents.
Cough suppressants. These are usually narcotic-based preparations that
require a prescription. They sometimes need to be given to the point of
sedating the dog, especially early in treatment.
Bronchodilators. These may help by relaxing the airways, allowing air to move
more easily into and out of the lungs. They can be given orally, by nebulizer, or
by inhalers.
Your veterinarian might prescribe a combination of these drugs, and alter the doses as the
disease is controlled to minimize side effects while still maintaining good control of the
coughing.
An important factor in successful therapy of chronic bronchitis is weight loss. If your pet is
overweight, a loss of even 5-10% of the body weight can dramatically improve the
coughing. When the dog is overweight, improving your dog’s condition is completely in
your hands; therefore, your veterinarian might prescribe a weight-loss program for your
pet in addition to the medications.
Your veterinarian might also ask you to keep a “coughing log” to keep track of the severity
and frequency of coughing, as this can help determine how successful the treatment is.
Prognosis
The prognosis for treating chronic bronchitis is good. However, because this condition
generally occurs in older dogs, other causes of chronic coughing (listed above) might
complicate the management. If coughing persists or recurs despite appropriate therapy,
your veterinarian might be required to pursue other causes, or refer you to a specialist for
additional diagnostic tests.
Co-authored by Dr. Mark Rishniw, ACVIM, and Dr. Rosie Henik, ACVIM

8/3/25, 12:05 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952974&ind=318&objTypeID=1007 2/3
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952974&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159706
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:05 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952974&ind=318&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Clostridium perfringens spores under the microscope.
Photo by Don Stalons of CDC.
Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 24, 2023
Published: February 13, 2006
When pets get chronic diarrhea, one of the
tests that sooner or later comes up is for
Clostridium perfringens. This bacterium
produces an unpleasant toxin. The situation
sounds simple: a pet gets infected with
toxin-forming bacteria, gets diarrhea, and
the diarrhea should at least improve when
toxin-forming bacteria are removed. As with
most things, the situation turns out to be
more complicated.
What is Clostridium perfringens?
Clostridial diseases are classic in medicine,
both veterinary and human. It is a
Clostridium that causes tetanus
and botulism, and clostridia are responsible
for gangrene, “black leg,” lamb dysentery,
and other famous maladies. Clostridia have several features in common that make them
especially nefarious but most importantly:
They produce toxins.
They are anaerobic (they grow in the absence of oxygen).
They form spores (essentially armor) so as to withstand environmental change,
including disinfectants that would kill more vulnerable bacteria.
Clostridium perfringens is one of the brothers of the evil Clostridium family but is further
classified into five biotypes (A, B, C, D and E) depending on what combination of four
toxins it produces. Dogs are almost exclusively infected with biotype A.
The toxins of significance that it can produce are called enterotoxins. We are particularly
concerned about the alpha, epsilon, and net E/F toxins. These toxins can be seen in
normal dogs, but if they are in high enough amounts, they are associated with diarrhea.
How Would Clostridium perfringens Infection Happen?
In order to produce toxin(s), the organism must form a spore (sporulate). Before it can do
that, it must make its way into the host's intestine from the outside world. The organism
enters the body orally: in food, grooming of fur, chewing up rotten dead things, etc.
When the organism arrives in the small intestine, it forms a spore and begins to produce
its toxin(s). Alternatively, the organism may have been happily and innocuously living in
the intestine for who knows how long when something causes it to sporulate and produce
toxin.

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952429&ind=321&objTypeID=1007 1/3
The trigger may be dietary, may be related to infection with another organism, or may
even be related to medications, especially antibiotics. The type of diarrhea produced is
generally a colitis, meaning the large intestine is affected. Such types of diarrhea are
mucousy, possibly bloody, and associated with straining. More watery diarrhea, as comes
from the small intestine, is also possible. The severity of the diarrhea can range from mild
to life-threatening, depending on how much toxin is produced. The important concept is
that C. perfringens toxin can be the cause of chronic diarrhea, or it can be a complicating
factor in diarrhea caused by something else.
Can we Test for Toxin-Producing Strains Of Clostridium perfringens?
The culture will not tell us if the strain present can produce the enterotoxin. Clearly, we
need to know more than whether there are any C. perfringens. How
about culturing for Clostridium perfringens? Again, cultures are not
very helpful. Clostridium perfringens can be cultured from the feces of 80% of dogs,
whether they have diarrhea or not. Some dogs seem to be unaffected.
This is where PCR testing comes in; it is a form of DNA testing whereby the C. perfringens
are tested for the DNA needed to make the different enterotoxins. In this way, we can
detect the genes that are capable of producing enterotoxin. Furthermore, the number of
gene copies can be measured so that we can tell if there are large or small amounts of
toxin genes. Large amounts of toxin genes are associated with disease, so in this way, we
can tell if one of the Clostridium perfringens enterotoxins is likely to be contributing to the
patient's diarrhea.
There is also a test for the toxin, but it is an ELISA format, which means it is either
negative or positive and does not say how much or how little toxin is present. In a perfect
world, this test is combined with the test for the toxin-producing genes so as to confirm
that not only are there large amounts of toxin genes, but they are confirmed to be
producing toxin.
The severity of the diarrhea can be mild all the way to life-threatening.
When Should We Treat for Clostridium perfringens?
Let's begin with the obvious: a pet does not need to be treated for C. perfringens unless
he has diarrhea. Since 80% of dogs harbor Clostridium perfringens whether they have
diarrhea or not, culturing Clostridium perfringens from a fecal sample will not be adequate
for diagnosis; we have to find the toxin or, at the very least, verify the presence of
significant amounts of Clostridial genes capable of producing toxin. And all this must be
found in a patient that actually has diarrhea.
The chances are that a fecal check for worms has been done, and a trial course of an
anti-diarrheal medication has been tried. A possible next step would be a PCR panel that
detects the DNA from an assortment of viruses and bacteria associated with diarrhea.
Often this type of panel includes a test for Clostridial enterotoxin DNA. The laboratory will
report a quantification of gene copies for CPA (the gene for the alpha toxin), CPE (the
gene for the epsilon toxin), and CP net E/F (the gene for the net E/F toxin). If the number
of toxin genes for any of these toxins is significant, treating with antibiotics against
Clostridium is indicated.
Keep in mind that Clostridial diarrhea might be the entire problem and curative with the
right antibiotic or it might be secondary to a bigger problem yet to be discovered.
Treatment for significant Clostridial diarrhea thus might yield only partial results.
Treating the Toxin-Positive Dog with Diarrhea
Any number of antibiotics can be used to remove it. Some choices include ampicillin,
amoxicillin, metronidazole, erythromycin, and tylosin. Tetracycline was formerly on the list,
but it has developed too much resistance. If C. perfringens is responsible for the diarrhea,

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952429&ind=321&objTypeID=1007 2/3
a response to antibiotics is generally seen in a couple of days, but the full course of
medication your veterinarian prescribed should still be completed.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952429&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159760
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Clostridium perfringens Causes Diarrhea in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952429&ind=321&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 16, 2021
Published: January 01, 2001
What on Earth are Coccidia?
Coccidia are single-celled organisms that infect the intestine. They are microscopic
parasites detectable on routine fecal tests in the same way that worms are, but coccidia
are not worms and are not susceptible to deworming medications. They are also not
visible to the naked eye. Coccidia infection causes watery diarrhea that is sometimes
bloody and can be a life-threatening problem to an especially young or small pet. There
are many different species of coccidia but for dogs and cats, the most common infections
are with coccidia of the genus Cystoisospora. Dogs and cats each have their own coccidia
species and cannot infect each other, nor can they infect people.
Where do Coccidia Come from?
Oocysts (pronounced o'o-sists) are passed in the stool. In the outside world, the oocysts
begin to mature or sporulate, which leaves them able to infect a new host. It only takes
12-36 hours for an oocyst to become infective and after that, any host that accidentally
swallows the oocyst will probably be infected. Because the oocyst becomes infective in
such a short time, it is important to remove stool as quickly as possible so that the pet's
environment does not become contaminated with infective oocysts.
Coccidia infection is especially common in young animals housed in groups (in shelters,
rescue areas, kennels, etc.) This is a common parasite and is not necessarily a sign of
poor husbandry.
Oocysts can also be swallowed by mice, flies, cockroaches or other insects. A dog or cat
can be infected by eating an animal carrying an oocyst.
What Happens after the Host Consumes the Oocyst?
This gets a little complicated, but the short version is that the oocyst breaks open and
releases eight sporozoites. These eight sporozoites go on to infect intestinal cells and,
once inside these cells, they divide rapidly over and over until a new stage called a
merozoite results. The merozoites divide and reproduce rapidly, filling up the intestinal cell
until it bursts. A multitude of merozoites are released when the cell bursts and they go on
to infect and similarly destroy more and more intestinal cells. When enough intestinal cells
are destroyed, in three to 11 days, bloody watery diarrhea and disease result.
Merozoites divide and reproduce asexually but eventually a sexual generation of coccidia
results in microgamonts, which are male, and macrogamonts which are female. They
merge and create an oocyst, which is what started the whole thing in the first place. The
oocyst passes in stool where it can infect a new host and the life cycle begins again.
How are Coccidia Detected?
A routine fecal test is a good idea for any new puppy or kitten whether there are signs of
diarrhea or not as youngsters are commonly parasitized. This sort of test is also a good
idea for any patient with diarrhea and is recommended at least once a year for healthy

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951548&ind=322&objTypeID=1007 1/3
dogs and cats as a screening test. Coccidia are microscopic and a test such as this is
necessary for diagnosis. Small numbers of coccidia can be hard to detect, so just because
a fecal sample tests negative, this doesn’t mean the pet isn’t infected. Sometimes several
fecal tests are performed, especially in a young pet with refractory diarrhea (one that won’t
go away); parasites may not be evident until later in the course of the condition.
How is Coccidia Treated?
There are two common treatments used for Cystoisospora infections in pets: sulfa drugs
(the traditional treatment) and coccidiocidal medications (newer treatment). The most
common medicines used against coccidia are called coccidiostats. They inhibit coccidial
reproduction. Once the numbers stop expanding, it is easier for the patient’s immune
system to catch up and wipe out the infection. This also means, though, that the time it
takes to clear the infection depends on how many coccidia organisms there are to start
with and how strong the patient’s immune system is. A typical treatment course lasts
about a week or two, but it is important to realize that the medication should be given until
the diarrhea resolves plus an extra couple of days. Medication should be given for at least
five days in total. Sometimes courses as long as a month are needed. In dogs and cats,
sulfa-based antibiotics are the most commonly used coccidiostats.
There are newer medications that actually kill the coccidia outright: ponazuril and
toltrazuril, both actually being farm animal products that can be compounded into
concentrations more appropriate for dogs and cats. These medications are able to curtail
a coccidial infection in only a few doses and have been used in thousands of shelter
puppies and kittens with no adverse effects. Their use is becoming more popular used in
kennels, catteries, and animal shelters and you may be pleasantly surprised to find one of
them in stock at your regular veterinary office.
Can People or other Pets Become Infected?
While there are species of coccidia that can infect people - Toxoplasma and
Cryptosporidium, for example - the Cystoisospora species of dogs and cats cannot infect
people. Other pets may become infected from exposure to infected fecal matter but it is
important to note that this is usually an infection of the young (i.e. the immature immune
system tends to let the coccidia infection reach large numbers whereas the mature
immune system probably will not.) In most cases, the infected new puppy or kitten does
not infect the resident adult animal.
Decontaminating the home environment may also be recommended by your veterinarian.
Since the oocysts are resistant to most commonly used disinfectants, prompt removal of
all stool, then scrubbing any soiled areas with a detergent, will be the best environmental
measure.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951548&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159782
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951548&ind=322&objTypeID=1007 2/3

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Coccidia Infects Intestines of Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951548&ind=322&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Distemper in Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: May 20, 2025
Published: September 15, 2023
Canine distemper virus, also referred to as CDV,
canine morbillivirus, and hardpad disease, is a
highly contagious disease affecting not just dogs
but many animals. Distemper occurs worldwide,
and dogs are the primary carriers of the disease.
Canine distemper virus can sometimes occur along
with other respiratory infections, including bacterial
diseases like Bordetella bronchiseptica,
Streptococcus equi sub. zooepidemicus, and
Mycoplasma spp.; and viruses, including canine
influenza virus, respiratory coronavirus,
parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, and herpesvirus.
CDV is commonly spread through droplets or spray from the nose and mouth, such as
through sneezing or coughing. However, infected dogs can shed the virus in nearly all
bodily fluids. CDV is carried to local lymph nodes within 24 hours of contact with cells in
the airways and lungs. Within a few days, the virus spreads to the spleen and abdominal
lymph nodes, then spreads through the blood to cells of the gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
urogenital tract, and central nervous system (CNS). The CNS tissues are typically infected
by day eight or nine, when neurological signs can be seen.
When the body’s immune system is triggered by exposure to disease, it reacts by
producing antibodies. These antibodies are made up of proteins that attack the virus or
bacteria causing the infection, hopefully protecting the body from getting sick. How strong
your dog’s immune system is will play a big part in how sick they become after exposure.
If an animal’s immune system can be activated to begin making antibodies to fight CVD by
the 14 day after exposure, the signs of the illness may not be noticed.
Dogs with mild to intermediate immune responses and delayed antibody titers (this means
your dog may test negative on distemper tests but still have the infection) will develop
clinical signs. While the virus can eventually be cleared as antibody levels rise, it may
persist for extended periods in the eye, the central nervous system (including the brain,
brainstem, and spinal cord), and some skin tissues (e.g., footpads).
By days nine to 14, dogs without good immune responses tend to experience severe
clinical signs and can die suddenly.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic testing starts with a physical exam and includes bloodwork, antibody tests,
cytology/histopathology of affected tissues, X-rays, cerebral spinal fluid analysis, eye
exams, and PCR testing. Sometimes, unfortunately, a CDV diagnosis can’t be made prior
to death, and a final diagnosis can be determined only after a veterinary pathologist has
examined the body.
th

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Distemper in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11692001&ind=324&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Animals Affected By Distemper
cat
jackal
coyote
hyena
lion
tiger
leopard
ferret
fox
weasel
raccoon
seal
sea lion
dolphin
Giant panda
certain primates
Health History and Signs
Dogs with mild distemper cases may exhibit a lack
of energy, decreased appetite, fever, coughing,
shortness of breath, and nasal discharge.
Dogs with more severe clinical disease may show
fever, nasal discharge, conjunctivitis, coughing,
difficulty breathing, vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss,
and dehydration. Secondary bacterial infections can
occur and can make the signs worse.
Your dog may also experience signs that the central
nervous system is involved, such as ataxia
(incoordination), limb weakness, myoclonus
(involuntary rhythmic muscle twitching), stiff neck,
and hyperesthesia (skin sensitivity). These signs can
occur at the same time or up to three weeks after
the onset of CVD and typically get worse over time.
Older dogs that have some immunity are more likely
to have no signs or just mild disease.
Eye problems include keratoconjunctivitis sicca (dry
eye), anterior uveitis (inflammation of the front part of the eye), and damage to the retina
(which allows the brain to process sight). The optic nerves, which carry information to the
brain from each eye, may develop optic neuritis (swelling and inflammation), leading to
blindness.
Skin problems in puppies include pustular dermatitis (blister-like sores that can be
chronic), and the skin of the nose or toe pad can develop hyperkeratosis (skin thickening).
When this happens in the toe pads, it is referred to as hardpad.
Infections in puppies can cause enamel hypoplasia (damage to the developing teeth).
Cardiomyopathy, or enlargement of the heart muscles, which may lead to cardiac issues,
is possible. Growing puppies have developed hypertrophic osteodystrophy (when bones
in the legs grow abnormally), causing pain.
Abortion and stillbirths can occur in pregnant dogs.
Ulcers of the mouth can occur, but they tend to be rare.
Clinical signs will vary, depending on which strain of the distemper virus is involved and
how well your dog’s immune system responds to the infection. Older dogs that have some
immunities are more likely to have no signs or just mild disease. Puppies and animals with
no immunity are more likely to have severe clinical signs.
Treatment And Management
Currently, no specific treatments are available for CDV.
Supportive care can include fluid therapy, antibiotics for secondary bacterial infections,
lung treatments for bronchopneumonia, anti-nausea and vomiting medications, steroids,
anti-seizure medications, etc. Supportive care will vary, depending on which parts of your
dog’s body have been affected.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on the viral strain and your dog’s immune response. Older dogs
with a good immune response may not have symptoms or a mild disease. Puppies or
those with a poor immune response tend to develop more severe disease.

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Distemper in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11692001&ind=324&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The most important factors affecting your dog’s prognosis are neurologic. The prognosis
for dogs that have neurological problems (the brain, spinal cord, and other nerves are
affected) is guarded to poor, and there is a 50% chance of death. Dogs that recover may
be immune to reinfection for long periods and may be immune for life.
Prevention
Hospitalized dogs with CVD must be isolated from other dogs. Dogs usually shed the
virus in urine, stool, saliva, nasal mucous, etc., for one to two weeks after the initial
infection. Dogs with neurologic signs can shed the virus for longer periods of time.
Extended quarantine may be necessary to prevent the spread to uninfected animals.
CDV is susceptible to many disinfectants. Talk with your veterinarian about how to best
disinfect areas, dishes, and toys when your dog comes home. Good hygiene practices
(e.g., handwashing, wearing gloves/protective clothing) are recommended when handling
infected dogs.
Vaccination
Vaccination is crucial in preventing your dog from getting CDV. Current guidelines
recommend vaccinating dogs at six to eight weeks of age and repeating the vaccine every
three to four weeks until the puppy is 14 to 16 weeks of age. Dogs would then receive
another vaccine one year after the initial series and then every three years afterward.
Distemper antibodies that puppies could have received from their mother’s milk
(colostrum) in the first few feedings, and that could prevent the vaccinations from working,
are typically gone by 12-14 weeks of age. In dogs that are more than 16 weeks old, the
initial vaccination series can consist of two vaccines given two to four weeks apart.
The majority of dogs develop protective antibody levels within one to two weeks following
vaccination.
Zoonotic Potential
A zoonotic is a disease that can be transferred from animals to humans. There is some
concern that humans might be susceptible to the canine distemper virus because of
recent CDV infections in primates. Because CDV is similar to the human measles virus,
additional concern has been raised because of the decrease in routine measles
vaccination by many humans. However, at the time of this writing, no evidence exists that
CDV can infect humans.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11692001&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159804
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:06 AM Distemper in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=11692001&ind=324&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Ehrlichia Infection in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 26, 2025
Published: August 15, 2005
What is Ehrlichia?
Ehrlichia, named after Dr. Paul Ehrlich, who first described them, are a type of bacteria
that infects and lives within the white blood cells of their hosts. Different types of Ehrlichia
live within different types of white blood cells. Hosts can be humans, pets, or wild
animals. Ehrlichia are spread from host to host by tick bites, and their intracellular location
makes them difficult to remove, as most antibiotics do not penetrate into the inside of
cells.
The two Ehrlichia of concern are Ehrlichia canis and Ehrlichia ewingii
The Crazy Ehrlichia Name Game (Making Sure You're on the Right Page)
Ehrlichia were originally grouped according to the type of white blood cell they attacked.
By finding Ehrlichia inside certain types of white blood cells, one could get a better idea of
which type of Ehrlichia one was seeing. Or so it was thought.
Previously thought:
Ehrlichia equi - lives in what are called granulocytes (a type of white cell).
Ehrlichia lewinii - lives in granulocytes as well.
Ehrlichia canis - lives in what are called monocytes (a different type of white
blood cell).
Ehrlichia risticii was an Ehrlichia like the rest, but genetic testing shows it is
actually a Neorickettsia, which is a whole other thing.
Ehrlichia platys was an Ehrlichia like the rest but turned out to be an
Anaplasma which is a whole other thing and is now Anaplasma platys.
Ehrlichia equi, Ehrlichia phagocytophila, and Human Granulocytic Ehrlichial
Agent were all separate organisms, but genetic testing shows they are all
different versions of Anaplasma phagocytophilia.
Your veterinarian may be using older names, depending on which system they were
trained with.
If your dog has been diagnosed with Anaplasmosis, read that article instead of this one.
Ehrlichia canis Infection (also Called Canine Monocytic Ehrlichiosis)
Ehrlichia canis infection is a worldwide disease. In the
U.S., it is spread by the bite of the brown dog
tick (Rhipicephalus sanguineus). It is unknown how long
the tick needs to remain attached in order to transmit
the Ehrlichia organism, but the previously accepted idea of
48 hours is probably outdated, and a much shorter time is

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Ehrlichia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952341&ind=325&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Brown dog tick. Photo courtesy of
CDC.
more likely. It is important to realize that this tick can
transmit other tick-borne infections (Babesiosis and Rocky
Mountain Spotted Fever), so infection with multiple
organisms is not unusual. It can be difficult to separate
which symptoms go with which tick-borne infection.
Ehrlichia canis was not well scrutinized until the Vietnam
War, when military German Shepherd dogs in the war
zone began dying in large numbers from an infection that
appeared to wipe out all their blood cells. This condition,
called "Tropical Canine Pancytopenia," was studied and
found not to be limited to Southeast Asia. In fact, it had
been in the good old U.S.A. all along. It turned out that
German Shepherd dogs get a much more severe form of
the disease, so it wasn't until large numbers of German
Shepherd dogs were infected together that the disease could be defined.
In the 1980s, it became clear that people could also be infected by Ehrlichia, though not
the same Ehrlichia as for dogs. When the human disease was recognized, research
intensified.
For information on the human disease, visit: https://www.cdc.gov/ehrlichiosis/index.html
When Dogs Get Sick: Ehrlichia Symptoms
There are three phases of illness with ehrlichiosis: acute, subclinical, and chronic.
Acute Phase
This phase occurs one to three weeks after the host is bitten by the tick. The Ehrlichia
organism is replicating in this time period and attaching to white blood cell membranes.
During the acute infection, the platelet count will drop, and immune-mediated platelet
destruction will occur. The dog will be listless, off food, and may have enlarged lymph
nodes and/or spleen. There may be fever and even neurologic symptoms as well, but
although the dog may seem pretty sick, this phase of infection is rarely lifethreatening. Most dogs clear the organism if they are treated in this stage, but those that
do not receive adequate treatment will go on to the next phase after 1 to 4 weeks.
Subclinical Phase
In this phase, the dog appears normal. The organism has sequestered in the spleen and
is essentially hiding out there. Dogs can stay in this phase for months or even years. The
only hints that Ehrlichia might be hiding are a somewhat reduced platelet count and/or
elevated blood globulin level (the protein portion that includes miscellaneous antibodies).
Long-term stimulation of the immune system will elevate globulins, sometimes
dramatically. Not all dogs ever progress to the chronic stage, but when they do, the
prognosis is worse.
Chronic Phase
In this phase, the dog gets sick again. Up to 60% of dogs infected chronically with
Ehrlichia canis will have abnormal bleeding due to reduced platelet numbers. Deep
inflammation in the eyes, called uveitis, may occur as a result of long-term immune
stimulation. Neurological effects may also be seen. A type of kidney disease
called glomerulonephritis, resulting in serious urinary protein loss, can also result.
Increased globulin levels are almost always seen in this stage; albumin is often low. Most
dogs in the U.S. do not show full pancytopenia (literally, a reduction in all blood cell lines),
but severe cell deficiencies are associated with high mortality rates.
Ehrlichia ewingii Infection (also called Canine Granulocytic Ehrlichiosis)
Ehrlichia ewingii is a different species of the Ehrlichia genus. It infects the white blood
cells known as granulocytes and is not generally as serious as Ehrlichia canis.

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Ehrlichia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952341&ind=325&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Lone star tick. Photo by CDC.
Dogs are usually only mildly ill or may appear uninfected,
but classically, symptoms include swollen, stiff joints,
arthritis, and fever.
Ehrlichia ewingii is spread by the bite of the lone star tick
(Amblyomma americanum).
How the Diagnosis is Made
There are two main tests for Ehrlichia: PCR testing for
Ehrlichia DNA or blood testing for Ehrlichia antibodies.
Antibody testing has been the main diagnostic for many
years, but the recent availability of PCR testing has
changed the approach.
Of course, if lucky, the organisms will be seen on a blood
smear, which clinches the diagnosis.
Antibody Testing
Traditionally, when ehrlichiosis is suspected, a blood test
for antibodies against Ehrlichia organisms can be ordered or performed in minutes using
an in-house test kit. There are some limitations to antibody testing. A positive test
indicates that the dog has been exposed to Ehrlichia but does not necessarily imply an
active current infection. A negative titer does not fully rule out Ehrlichia, either, as a very
sick patient may be too ill to produce antibodies, and an early case may not yet have
started to produce them. Antibody titers can be measured in the laboratory, which makes it
much easier to track progression; the in-house test kits are simply either positive or
negative, and a numeric value is not provided.
It takes six to nine months after infection for antibody levels to drop. Antibodies
against Ehrlichia canis and Ehrlichia ewingii will cross-react, so it is not easy to determine
which organism a dog has been exposed to.
PCR Testing
Recently, PCR testing for the presence of Ehrlichia DNA has become available. A laboratory
commonly offers a tick panel, which uses PCR testing to screen for a group of classic tickborne diseases. PCR testing remains positive for several weeks after the infection has
cleared, as it does not distinguish between live and dead organisms. It takes time to clear
dead organisms from the body.
These two forms of testing are complementary, which means an antibody test can be
used to screen dogs to identify those that have been infected. Treatment can be
prescribed, and after the treatment has been completed and a couple of weeks have
passed, the PCR test can be used to check if the infection has cleared by testing for any
residual Ehrlichia DNA.
Treatment
Doxycycline is probably the most effective against Ehrlichia (and any other intracellular
blood parasite, for that matter). Expect at least a month of treatment to be needed. The
response is initially rapid (improvement is notable in the first few days). Dogs in the acute
or subclinical stage at the time of treatment can expect to be cured. A common protocol
involves 28 days on doxycycline and a PCR test 2 weeks post-treatment. If the test is
negative, another final PCR test is done in two months. If the post-treatment test is
positive, another 28 days of doxycycline is used, and a two-week post-treatment PCR is
repeated as before. If this second post-treatment PCR test is still positive, another
medication (such as chloramphenicol or imidocarb) should be used.
If immune-mediated secondary reactions to Ehrlichia are a problem (such as immunemediated arthritis or immune-mediated platelet loss), corticosteroids such as prednisone
can be used to palliate the situation while the antibiotics are starting to work.

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Ehrlichia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952341&ind=325&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Dogs in the chronic stage are more difficult to treat as they are sicker and more
debilitated. A blood transfusion may be needed, and the mortality rate is much higher.
Surviving dogs can become re-infected as Ehrlichia immunity is not lifelong.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952341&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159829
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Ehrlichia Infection in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952341&ind=325&objTypeID=1007 4/4
After several days in the hospital, the outcome was a good one for
this cat. Photo Courtesy MarVista Vet.
Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 31, 2025
Published: July 30, 2001
It is important to get the message
out early: Fleas aren't just a
nuisance. They drink blood, and
blood loss can kill.
In almost every case, the owner
had no idea that flea infestation
could be lethal.
It is hard to imagine that something
as tiny as a flea could be
dangerous. It is common
knowledge fleas can make pets
itch. Many pet owners are familiar
with the spectacular skin
inflammation in a flea-bite-allergic
pet, but many people forget that
fleas drink blood and that lots of
fleas can drink a lot of blood. The
physical state of inadequate red
blood cells is called anemia, and when it is severe enough, it is a life-threatening
condition.
Pets will not itch from their fleas unless they are allergic to flea bites. No
scratching does not mean no fleas.
It is easy to underestimate a pet’s infestation. Only animals allergic to flea bites will itch
from their fleas. This means that the animal who is not allergic to flea bites will not be
scratching or losing hair. Thus, an owner may not realize that the pet has a heavy
infestation. If your pet is effective at licking and self-grooming, it may be hard to see the
fleas, especially if the owner does not have a flea comb. Do not rely on your own ability to
see the fleas; use reliable flea control regardless of what you see or do not see.
Check for Flea Dirt
The black, pepper-like specks found in an infested pet’s coat are actually bits of blood that
have been sucked up by the flea and excreted in neat little packages to feed the larval
fleas that hatch in the environment. Even if live fleas are not seen, flea dirt means that live
fleas are there.
Who Is Most Vulnerable?
It takes a lot of fleas to produce enough blood loss to create a life-threatening situation for
the host pet, but it still happens commonly. The following situations are high risk for flea
anemia:

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951428&ind=326&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Very young kittens being raised
outdoors or by a mother cat who
goes outdoors. Young kittens are
small and do not have blood to
spare. Furthermore, they are
growing and trying to expand their
blood volume; they are too young
to groom themselves effectively
and remove their own fleas. Flea
anemia is probably the number one
cause of death in open-household
kittens.
Elderly cats who go outdoors. The
elderly cat is often debilitated from other metabolic problems. Grooming is less
efficient, and an older cat is just not strong enough to withstand much blood
loss.
Outdoor puppies' situation is similar to that of kittens’: too small to effectively
groom and trying to grow in the face of ongoing blood loss.
Eventually, the weakness catches up with these animals, and they will die unless they
receive a blood transfusion.
Evaluation
The good news is that these patients can still be treated even fairly late in the course of
the disease. Often, they will need blood transfusions or transfusions with blood
substitutes. They will also need to have their fleas removed and will ultimately need to be
returned to an environment where they will be protected from further flea infestation.
The first step is recognizing the problem. This is not difficult for a trained veterinary
healthcare worker, but it may not be easy for an uninformed pet owner. The affected
animal will have pale gums (normal gums are shell-pink; anemic gums can be completely
white). In advanced diseases, the patient will be listless and even cold. A flea comb can
be used to check for flea dirt. Pets sometimes eat small pebbles, dirt, or cat litter when
they are anemic in an effort to obtain more iron.
Be familiar with the normal color of your pet’s gums so that you can recognize a
problem.
Regular flea combing can help nip a big problem in the bud.
Use flea control products all year round so you don't get caught with a surprise
heavy flea burden in the spring.
A test called a hematocrit (HCT) or packed cell volume (PCV) is easily done in your
veterinarian's office to find out the severity of your pet's anemia. The hematocrit or PCV
reflects the percentage of red blood cells that should be in a sample of blood.
Normal Hematocrit/ PCV Ranges:
Dogs: 37-55
Cats: 30-45
Treatment
Blood transfusions may be considered when values reach 20 or less, as recommended by
your veterinarian.

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951428&ind=326&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Ridding the critically ill patient of fleas can be problematic. Often, the patient is too sick to
tolerate the stress of a bath and is too young or too small for flea control products. In this
situation, veterinarians have to use their judgment on the safest route to remove the fleas.
Nitenpyram (brand names Capstar®, PetArmor FastCaps®, and Capguard®) is a simple
product that has greatly enhanced our ability to clear fleas from a patient quickly and
safely. Nitenpyram is available without a prescription as a fast-acting flea-killing tablet. It is
labeled for use in animals weighing 2 lbs. or more and begins killing fleas within 20
minutes of oral administration. While it does not provide long-acting flea protection, its
ability to rapidly remove a lethal flea burden has made it especially popular for use on
patients with dangerous flea infestations.
Returning Home
Of course, after all the blood transfusions, heat support, and flea removal, the pet will
ultimately go home, potentially to the same environment where the infestation occurred in
the first place. Usually, topical flea control products will provide adequate future protection,
and the use of a vitamin and iron supplement will help the patient rebuild red blood cell
reserves.
If the infestation is severe, consider treating the home environment separately before the
patient returns to it. Your veterinarian can help you select safe and effective home
treatments. The most important prevention is the owner's education.
There Is No Reason for a Pet to Carry a Flea Burden in This Day and Age
There are still common misconceptions among pet owners:
People commonly believe they have flea bite sensitivity, and if they do not
perceive flea biting, then there cannot be a significant flea burden.
Fleas actually only bite people when they are newly emerged from their
cocoons (all insects undergo a caterpillar/cocoon stage) and are hunting for
their permanent host.
Waiting for a person to perceive a flea bite requires the flea population to have
successfully established itself in the environment (e.g., the house) and
progressed to the production of new adult fleas. In reality, when fleas bite
people, a significant population is present for weeks or longer.
Many people believe that a pet with fleas will scratch or be itchy. In reality, only
the pets allergic to fleas will be itchy.
It is also commonly believed that fleas are simply part of pet ownership and that
there is no way to avoid them. This may have been true at one time, but, in
reality, fleas have been optional for decades, with flea control methods
achieving higher levels of convenience and safety each year. The days of
sprays, powders, and foggers are largely gone, supplanted by chewable tablets
and spot-on preparations. No pet needs to have fleas in the 21 century, and
new products are being released every year.
The general pet-owning population has certainly heard of fleas and is aware of most
of the modern flea control products. Yet, still, pets die from this easily preventable
problem because people do not realize how serious it can be and cannot recognize
when it has gotten to a serious point. Be proactive and keep up your flea control all
year round; if you wait for what you think of as warm weather, your pet may well
already be infested. Do not assume a pet with fleas will scratch. Do not assume that if
the humans are not being bitten, then the flea burden must be light. Do not be one of
those people whose beloved pet is lost to an easily preventable disease.
st

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951428&ind=326&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Compare flea-preventive products to help you decide which product is best for your
situation. If you need help selecting flea control products, remember that your veterinarian
and staff are professionally educated in this subject and will be happy to assist you.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951428&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159852
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:07 AM Flea Anemia in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951428&ind=326&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Larvae hatch from the eggs and develop in a pet’s environment
by feeding on adult flea feces (i.e. digested blood) that fall out
of the hair coat, as seen here with a flea comb. Photo by Dr.
Wendy Brooks.
Flea Control for Dogs and Cats
The VIN Dermatology Consultants
Revised: October 31, 2023
Published: November 15, 2003
Fleas are the most common external
parasites of companion animals. In
addition to causing itching and other
skin problems, fleas can transmit
diseases to animals and people. The
majority of the flea population (i.e.
eggs, larvae, and pupae) are found off
the pet and around the home.
The ideal flea control program uses
products that target all of the various
stages of the flea life cycle and treats
the pet’s environment.
The Life Cycle of the Flea:
Ctenocephalides felis
The flea life cycle consists of egg,
larval, pupal, and adult stages. Eggs
are laid in the hair coat and are
designed to fall off your pet and into
your home. Larvae hatch from the eggs and develop in a pet’s environment by feeding on
adult flea feces (i.e. digested blood) that fall out of the hair coat of the pet. Larvae
eventually spin cocoons, often within carpet fibers, for pupation. Pupae are resistant to
freezing, drying, and insecticides, and can lie dormant for many months! New fleas
develop from pupae and can begin feeding within hours of finding a dog or cat. The entire
flea life cycle can be completed in as little as three weeks.
Today's Flea Control Products
In the past, veterinarians and pet owners had to try to control fleas by treating the
environment of the animal for the immature flea stages. This approach was labor-intensive
and required frequent applications. Although some older flea control products could be
applied to pets, these products did not kill fleas quickly enough or were not long-lasting.
Today, veterinarians have some great flea control products in our arsenal. There are now
many effective and safe new products to choose from.
Flea Control Recommendations
Treat all pets with a flea control product as directed by your veterinarian. Do
NOT use permethrin-containing products on cats. As fleas can live indoors
even in the winter, your veterinarian may also recommend year-round flea
control.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Flea Control for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951999&ind=327&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Sometimes, a pet’s indoor environment also needs to be treated for fleas using
a flea spray designed to quickly kill fleas and stop their reproduction. There are
pet-safe options available, and always consult your veterinarian to find the best
products for your needs. To use an environmental flea spray around your
home:
Remove your pets from the area to be sprayed.
Wash all bedding.
Vacuum all carpets and upholstery and then discard the vacuum bag. This
will prevent the flea eggs from hatching in vacuum bags and spreading
through your home.
Apply environmental flea spray to all surfaces until damp to the touch.
Sometimes, a pet’s outdoor environment will also need to be treated for fleas.
Your veterinarian can recommend a product for you to use, or the outdoor
environment can be treated professionally by pest control specialists.
ALWAYS wait until all surfaces have dried before allowing your pets back into a
treated area.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951999&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159876
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Flea Control for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951999&ind=327&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Electron micrograph of a Giardia trophozoite. Photo
courtesy CDC
Giardia in Pets
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 12, 2023
Published: September 15, 2006
See the article summary below.
What is Giardia?
Giardia are single-celled organisms,
infectious to many types of animals
(including humans) all over the world. As
you can see in the above image, Giardia
organisms have little whip-like tentacles
called flagella that classify them as
flagellates. They use their flagella to move
around from place to place, but when they
find a spot where they wish to stay (like a
cozy nook in the host's intestine), they use a
suction cup-like structure (visible in the
image) to attach. Their presence in the host
intestine can cause diarrhea, though some
hosts are symptom-free carriers. Different
types of Giardia infect different types of
animals; it is rare for Giardia from a pet to
transmit to a human; furthermore, dog and
cat Giardia species are separate and are
unlikely to cross from dog to cat or vice
versa.
Giardia has two forms: the trophozoite and the cyst. The trophozoite is the form that lives
within the host, swimming around and attaching with its suction cup. The cyst, however, is
the form that lives out in the environment. Trophozoites round up to cysts as they
approach the colon and then are passed in feces. Trophozoites that don't round up into
cysts and form shells before passing into the cold, cruel world cannot withstand the
temperature/moisture variability of the outside world. Cysts are the contagious stage.
Trophozoites are in the parasitic stage.
Giardia Transmission
As mentioned, trophozoites and cysts may be passed in fresh feces, but only the hardshelled little cysts can withstand the conditions of the outside world. The cysts live in the
environment (outside the host's body) potentially for months until they are consumed by a
host. Inside the host, the cyst's shell is digested away, releasing two trophozoites into the
intestine, and the cycle begins again. Contaminated water is the classical source of a
Giardia infection.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952529&ind=328&objTypeID=1007 1/4
When a fecal sample is analyzed, the appearance of the Giardia organism depends on
whether the sample is freshly obtained or if it has been outside of the host's body for a
while. Giardia organisms begin to round up into cysts in a matter of hours. The active
trophozoites rather look like funny faces with the two nuclei forming the eyes and median
bodies forming the mouth. Cysts look a bit more generic.
In the environment, cysts survive in water and soil as long as it is relatively cool and wet. A
host animal will accidentally swallow a cyst when drinking from a puddle, or toilet, or when
licking fur. After the cyst has been swallowed, the cyst's shell is digested away, freeing the
two trophozoites that go forth and attach to the intestinal lining.
As mentioned, the trophozoite will swim to a spot using its flagella and attach with its
suction cup (more correctly called its "ventral disc"). Trophozoites tend to live in different
intestinal areas in different host species but will move to other areas depending on the diet
the host is eating. The trophozoite may round itself up and form a cyst while still inside the
host's body. If the host has diarrhea, both trophozoites and cysts may be shed in diarrhea;
either form can be found in fresh stool.
After infection, it takes 5 to 12 days in dogs or 5 to 16 days in cats for Giardia to be found
in the host’s stool. Diarrhea can precede the shedding of the Giardia. Infection is more
common in kennel situations where animals are housed in groups.
How Does Giardia Cause Diarrhea?
Infection seems to cause problems with normal intestinal absorption of vitamins and other
nutrients. Diarrhea is generally not bloody with a Giardia infection. Immune-suppressive
medications, such as corticosteroids, can re-activate an old Giardia infection. We do not
know why some infected hosts get diarrhea while others never do.
Diagnosis
In the past, diagnosis was difficult. The stool sample being examined needed to be fresh,
plus Giardia rarely showed up on the usual fecal testing methods used to detect other
parasites. Several tricks have been developed to make Giardia easier to find
(special stains, using special processing solutions, etc.), but what has made the biggest
difference in the diagnosis of Giardia is the ELISA test kit, which is similar in format to a
home pregnancy test. This method has dramatically improved the ability to
detect Giardia infections and the test can be completed in just a few minutes while you
wait.
Giardia shed organisms intermittently and may be difficult to detect. Sometimes pets must
be retested in order to find an infection, and asymptomatic carrier animals are common. It
should also be mentioned that the ELISA test can remain positive for some time after the
infection has been eradicated so if re-testing is desired after a positive test, another test
format may be more helpful than the ELISA test kit.
Treatment
A broad-spectrum dewormer called
fenbendazole (Panacur®) seems to be the
most reliable treatment at this time.
Metronidazole (Flagyl®) has been a classical
treatment for Giardia but studies show it to
only be effective in 67% of cases. For some
resistant cases, both medications are used
concurrently. Febantel is also commonly
used for Giardia as it is converted to
fenbendazole in the body.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952529&ind=328&objTypeID=1007 2/4
This photo shows the upper surface of a Giardia
protozoan isolated from a rat’s intestine. Photo by Dr.
Stan Erlandsen and Dr. Dennis Feely, Courtesy of the
CDC.
Because cysts can stick to the fur of the
infected patient and be a source for reinfection, the positive animal should receive
a bath at least once in the course of
treatment. At the least, the patient should
have a bath at the end of treatment, plus it is especially important to promptly remove
infected fecal matter to minimize environmental contamination.
Can Humans Be Infected?
The short answer is only rarely, so the concern is pretty low in general. However, maintain
good hygiene practices such as regular hand-washing and removing fresh pet fecal matter
promptly, as mentioned.
That said, here is a more detailed answer: Giardia duodenalis is classified into several
subcategories called assemblages and designated A through G. Some assemblages are
specific as to which host animals they can infect, and other assemblages are not so picky.
Assemblage F, for example, only infects cats, and assemblages C and D only infect dogs
but assemblage A will infect dogs, cats, people, rodents, wild mammals, and cattle.
Common testing methods do not indicate what assemblage has been detected, so there is
always a possibility of human transmission if the assemblage is unknown.
Environmental Decontamination
Giardia cysts are killed in the environment by freezing temperatures and by direct sunlight.
If neither of these is practical for the area to be disinfected, a chemical disinfectant will be
needed. Organic matter such as dirt or stool is protective of the cyst, so on a concrete
surface, do basic cleaning before disinfecting. Quaternary ammonia compounds can be
used to kill Giardia cysts.
Animals should be thoroughly bathed before being reintroduced into a clean area. A
properly chlorinated swimming pool should not be able to become contaminated. As for
areas with lawns or plants, decontamination will not be possible without killing the plants
and allowing the area to dry out in direct sunlight.
A Footnote on Vaccination
A vaccine against Giardia was previously available, not to prevent infection in a
vaccinated pet but to reduce the shedding of cysts by the vaccinated patient. In other
words, the vaccine was designed to reduce the contamination of a kennel where Giardia
was expected to be a problem. This would be helpful during an outbreak in a shelter or
rescue situation but is not particularly helpful to the average dog owner who wants to
simply prevent infection. Because of the limited usefulness of the vaccine, manufacturing
was discontinued in 2009.
In Summary:
Giardia is a parasite that sticks to its host's small intestine to feed.
It has two forms: one that lives in the environment (cyst) and one that lives
in the host (trophozoite).
Cysts are the contagious stage, and trophozoites are in the parasitic stage.
Transmission is by the fecal-oral route from infected stool
or contaminated water.
After infection, it takes 5 to 12 days for dogs or 5 to 16 days for cats for
Giardia to be found in the stool.
Infection is more common in kennels or shelters where animals are housed
in groups.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952529&ind=328&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Giardia causes diarrhea ranging from minor to severe. Veterinarians don't
know why some infected hosts get diarrhea while others never do.
Giardia rarely transmits from a pet to a human or vice versa.
Diagnosis requires a fresh fecal sample. Several tests may be needed as
false negatives can occur.
Treatment includes dewormers and metronidazole (antibiotic).
A low-residue, highly digestible diet may be beneficial until stools are firm.
Because infective cysts can stick to fur, patients should be bathed
frequently during and at the end of treatment.
The environment has to be cleaned after every case because it is so
contagious. Giardia can be killed with common disinfectants. Quaternary
ammonia compounds are the most effective.
Giardia cysts are killed in the environment by freezing temperatures and by
direct sunlight.
To kill Giardia on a concrete surface, do basic cleaning before disinfecting.
Lawns and plants cannot be decontaminated without killing the plants and
allowing them to dry out in direct sunlight.
No vaccine is available.
Additional information from the Companion Animal Parasite Counsel (CAPC):
DrontalPlus® is effective in treating Giardia in dogs when administered per label
directions.
CAPC Board majority opinion is that asymptomatic dogs may not require treatment.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952529&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159898
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:08 AM Giardia in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952529&ind=328&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Additional Resources
Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and
Cats
Heartworm Infection in Cats
Heartworm Preventive Comparison
for Dogs and Cats
Heartworm: The Parasite
Preventing Heartworm Infection in
Dogs
What Happens in Heartworm Disease
Heartworm Treatment for Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 29, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
It has been said that the treatment of
heartworm infection is something of an
art. Several strategies can be used
depending on the dog's medical condition,
including the option of not treating at all.
The important concept to realize is that,
while there are off-label alternative
heartworm-killing protocols, the FDAapproved method of killing adult
heartworms involves very harsh arsenicbased drugs, and killing large adult
heartworms is neither simple nor safe.
Let's review some of the dangers and
options in clearing the body of this
parasite.
Patient Evaluation
Before therapy, the heartworm patient is assessed and rated for risk into one of four
categories. Important factors include how many worms are thought to be present based
on the tests performed, the size of the dog, the age of the dog, concurrent health factors,
the severity of the heart disease, and the degree to which exercise can be restricted in the
recovery period. Some hospitals use computerized formulas to categorize heartworminfected patients. The categories into which patients are grouped are as follows:
Class I: Lowest Risk. These dogs are typically without symptoms, and their
infection is a surprise discovery during a routine annual health examination when a
positive test comes up. Other blood tests are normal, and radiographs show mild
changes, if any change at all.
Class II: Moderately
Affected. Healthy dogs with
minimal signs as above,
occasional coughing, and
fatigue only with exercise but
with radiographs that show
definite evidence of heart
disease. Lab testing shows
mild anemia, and urine
dipsticks show some protein
present but not severe urinary
protein loss.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Class I: Lowest Risk. These dogs are typically without symptoms,
and their infection is a surprise discovery during a routine annual
health examination when a positive test comes up. Other blood tests
are normal, and radiographs show mild changes if any change at all.
Chest radiograph from a mildly affected dog. Photo courtesy of VIN.
Class III: Severely Affected. The dog is suffering from weight loss,
cough, difficulty breathing, and blatant damage to the vasculature is
apparent on radiographs, lab work reveals a more severe anemia and
marked urinary protein loss. The damage to the lung blood vessels
from the worms creates extra resistance for the heart to pump
against, and often episodes of collapse occur with exercise. If the
damage is severe enough, the heart can actually fail to pump
through all the clogged-up blood vessels. Class III dogs are expected
to die without treatment but are, unfortunately, sick enough that
treatment itself is not without risk. Chest radiograph from a severely
affected dog. Photo courtesy of VIN
Class III: Severely Affected.
Dogs suffer from weight loss,
cough, difficulty breathing, and
blatant damage to the
vasculature, which is apparent
on radiographs; lab work
reveals a more severe anemia
and marked urinary protein
loss. The damage to the lung
blood vessels from the worms
creates extra resistance for
the heart to pump against, and
often, episodes of collapse
occur with exercise.
If the damage is severe
enough, the heart can fail to
pump through all the cloggedup blood vessels. Class III
dogs are expected to die
without treatment but are,
unfortunately, sick enough that
treatment itself is not without
risk.
Class IV: Caval Syndrome.
Dogs collapse in shock, and
dark brown urine is evident.
Heartworms are visible by
ultrasound in the AV valve of
the right side of the heart, with
very abnormal bloodwork. These dogs are dying and can only be saved by the
physical removal of adult heartworms via an incision through the jugular vein. If such
a dog can be saved from this crisis, further treatment cannot be contemplated until
the dog is stable enough to fit into one of the other categories above.
After knowing what class the patient fits in, treatment can be determined. The dog has
three groups of heartworms in their body: microfilariae (basically newborn worms whose
parents are living inside the dog in question), newly arrived immature worms (relatively
fresh from the mosquito bite and living in the skin tissues), and adult worms themselves.
Microfilariae are the first-stage larvae (basically the youngest stage). These are the
children of the adult worms living in the heart and blood vessels. The mother worm
gives live birth (no eggs involved), and the babies swim freely in the host's
bloodstream. They must be killed so that they cannot be picked up by mosquitos
and transmitted to new dogs.
The newly arrived heartworm larvae have been freshly delivered from mosquito bites
in the last three months. These are third and fourth-stage larvae living in the skin.
For practical purposes, the L5 larvae are included in this group. The L5s are old
enough to leave the skin tissues and enter the circulation, but they are not mature
enough to be called adults. This group of young worms (L3s and L4s in the skin and
L5s in the circulation) represents the first five to seven months of infection. These
should be killed before they reach maturity and begin to wreak havoc on the
cardiovascular system of the host.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Larva climbing into skin. Graphic by
MarVistaVet.
A heart with heartworms. Graphic by
MarVistaVet.
The older L5 larvae and adult worms live inside the
heart and pulmonary arteries. This group requires
the arsenic compounds for destruction, while the
other two groups can be killed with less toxic
products.
After Staging
After knowing what Class the patient fits in, treatment
can be determined. The goal is to get rid of all three
groups of worms with as little inflammatory reaction as
possible. Since the adult worms are the largest, it is not
surprising that their deaths generate the most
inflammation. The hope is to stage the worm-killing
process so that when the time comes to kill the adult
worms, there are as few adult worms as possible, and
the patient should be as healthy as possible while going into the process. For the sake of
terminology, adulticides are products that kill adult worms, and larvicides kill immature
worms.
Stabilization First
Discuss exercise restrictions needed before, during, and
after treatment with your veterinarian. Expect strict
exercise restriction to be needed after adulticide therapy.
Some dogs will need anti-inflammatory doses of steroids
to control the inflammation that stems from the presence
of worms. This is often done concurrently with the second
step, as described below.
Killing the Microfilaria and Migrating Worms
The next step in treatment is clearing the migrating
immature worms. Heartworm treatment is a project that
lasts at least a couple of months. Within that time frame,
it is best that immature worms are prevented from
maturing. Since our goal is to have fewer adult worms
when the time comes to kill the adult worms, it is best to
kill the younger worms right off the bat.
The tissue-based L3 and L4 larvae are killed by monthly
macrocyclic lactone-based heartworm preventive products (avermectins and milbemycin).
Killing the L3 and L4 larvae prevents heartworm infection. Some of these products can
also kill circulating microfilariae (which need to pass through a mosquito before becoming
infective to other animals). The only FDA-approved product for killing microfilariae after
adulticide therapy is Advantage Multi®, which contains moxidectin. Other products can be
used for this purpose also, but it should be noted that an anaphylactoid reaction can occur
if a large number of microfilariae are killed rapidly with products such as high-dose
ivermectin (off-label) or high-dose milbemycin (e.g., Interceptor). This problem has not
been noted with Advantage Multi. While low-dose ivermectin products (e.g., Heartgard)
will gradually eliminate microfilariae in most dogs, the package insert discourages it for
this use.
Killing Wolbachia
Wolbachia is a genus of rickettsial organisms (sort of like bacteria, but not exactly)
that live inside heartworms of all developmental stages. Their numbers begin to expand
once the young worms reach their infectious stage. Wolbachia organisms seem to be

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 3/6
protective or beneficial to the heartworms that harbor them, aiding in metabolism and
general worm health. Without Wolbachia colonization, many female worms are not able to
reproduce, and third-stage larvae are not able to infect new hosts.
Wolbachia organisms possess inflammatory surface proteins that are released when adult
worms die or are killed in treatment, and these proteins greatly increase the chances of
severe circulatory reactions in the canine host.
It has been found that killing Wolbachia with an antibiotic such as doxycycline helps treat
the heartworm infection as the Wolbachia can be removed from their heartworm hosts,
thereby weakening the worm and minimizing the release of inflammatory proteins when
the worm finally dies. To minimize reactions, the American Heartworm Society
recommends using doxycycline along with heartworm preventives for a good month as
soon as the diagnosis is made and prior to the use of the arsenic compounds needed to
kill the adults.
Killing the Adult Worms
The only product currently licensed for treating adult heartworms is melarsomine
dihydrochloride (Immiticide or Diroban ). If you follow the manufacturer's
recommendations, treatment can be done in two or three doses, depending on the class
of heartworm infection. Most clinicians, however, opt to treat all patients with the threedose protocol as it creates a more gradual kill of the adult worms (which is safer in terms
of embolism and shock). There is also a less effective two-dose protocol that may still be
used.
The patient receives an intramuscular injection deep in the lower back muscles. This is a
painful injection with a painful substance, and it is common for the patient to be quite sore
at home afterward. Pain medication may be needed. Be careful around the injection site,
as the pet may bite. The site may form an abscess that requires warm compresses.
Approximately 30% of dogs experience some injection site reaction. These generally
resolve in one to four weeks.
In the two-dose protocol, the dog returns for a second injection the next day on the
opposite side of the lower back. In the three-dose protocol, the dog comes back one
month later for two doses 24 hours apart (the first dose kills most or all of the more
sensitive male worms, leaving the female worms to be killed with the next two doses).
Keep in mind that too many worms dying at once can cause problems. The benefit of the
three-dose protocol (sometimes called the split dose protocol) is that the first injection
serves to kill off any older or weaker worms without killing off the stronger, younger ones.
When the two consecutive doses occur one month later, there will be fewer worms dying
at once.
After treatment, the patient must be strictly confined for one month following the final
treatment. There are no walks or running around. The dog must live an indoor life. This is
because embolism, to some degree, is inevitable, and it is important to minimize
embolism-related problems. Exercise increases heart rate and oxygen demand, and the
heart needs to rest during this recovery period.
Watch for:
Coughing
Fever
Nose bleeds
If any of these occur, report them to the veterinarian right away. The most critical period is
seven to 10 days following a melarsomine treatment, but these signs can occur anytime in
the following month.
The "Slow Kill Method" With Ivermectin Only
® ®

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 4/6
Melarsomine treatment is expensive and often out of reach for rescue groups, shelters,
and many individuals. If the dog is stable (Class I), one option is to simply leave the dog
on an ivermectin-based preventive. This option has led to a great deal of misconception
about the ability of ivermectin to kill adult heartworms.
Ivermectin Misconceptions and Rumors:
Ivermectin does not kill adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does shorten the lifespan of adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does sterilize adult heartworms.
Ivermectin does kill microfilaria (keeping the dog from being a source of
contagion).
Ivermectin does kill L3 and L4 larvae (preventing new infections).
This means that if you opt to treat a heartworm-positive dog with only an ivermectin
heartworm preventive, you can expect the dog to remain heartworm-positive for at least
two years, and the heartworm disease will progress during that time. This is not good for
your dog but certainly beats getting no treatment of any kind.
The "Slow Kill Method" With Mox-Dox
Adding doxycycline to ivermectin has changed the way slow kill works. As the "slow kill"
protocol evolved, topical moxidectin has been substituted for ivermectin, and a month of
twice daily doxycycline is used to kill the Wolbachia bacteria that are so protective of the
living heartworms. The result seems to be a much faster slow kill with microfilaria clearing
in three weeks or so (addressing the resistance in microfilaria's slow kill issue). The adult
worms die over three to four months, similar to the three-dose protocol. (One to three
months on preventive, one dose of melarsomine with two doses following a month after
that). Exercise restriction is still needed, and relatively high doses of moxidectin are also
needed. These can be achieved either with topicals such as Advantage Multi (Advocate)
or with long-acting injectable products (ProHeart 12).
In the case of the injectable product, it is given every six months (even though it is
licensed for once-yearly administration). Heartworm antigen testing is performed nine
months after starting the protocol and continued monthly until negative. If the dog is still
heartworm antigen positive after 15 months, new decisions should be made (do mox-dox
again, use melarsomine, etc.). Studies, although relatively small, have suggested similar
effectiveness to melarsomine in rendering dogs “heartworm-free”.
Related resources
Heartworm Diagnosis in Dogs and Cats - July 15, 2025
Heartworm Infection in Cats - May 26, 2025
Heartworm: The Parasite - April 4, 2024
Heartworm Disease in Dogs: You are being redirected to updated information on this topic -
August 17, 2023
Heartworm Preventive Comparison Chart for Dogs and Cats - April 11, 2023
Preventing Heartworm Infection in Dogs - August 7, 2019
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951486&pid=19239
1808d05e-3c47-47d3-98b5-776764f1b977.1754159947

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 5/6
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Heartworm Treatment for Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951486&ind=331&objTypeID=1007 6/6
Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 19, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
What is Helicobacter?
Helicobacter is a genus of spiral bacteria that, amazingly, is able to survive the severe
acidity of the stomach. The existence of such bacteria has been known of since 1889, but
it wasn't until nearly 100 years later that their significance was realized.
Until the 1980s, stomach ulcers were treated with an assortment of antacids with the idea
that excess acid had caused the ulcer. It turned out that most stomach ulcers of humans
weren't from excess stomach acid but were from Helicobacter infection instead. Treatment
is aimed at both reducing stomach acid and killing Helicobacter.
Currently, this ulcerative infection is treated with medications that reduce stomach acid
secretion combined with antibiotics specifically directed against Helicobacter.
The relationship between Helicobacter and stomach ulceration is not simple. Stress plays
a part as does concurrent disease. Most dogs and cats harbor Helicobacter in their
stomachs and never get sick as a result but in the right circumstances, a Helicobacter
infection can complicate other intestinal disease.
How Does Helicobacter Cause Damage?
Very few organisms can withstand the extreme acidity of the stomach. The tissue of the
stomach is protected by a layer of mucus into which bicarbonate is secreted as an acid
neutralizer. The integrity of this mucus lining keeps us from being burned by our own
stomach acid.
Helicobacter survives by using enzymes to create its own layer of protective bicarbonate.
This little safety suit allows the bacteria to actually burrow into the stomach without regard
for the extreme acid surrounding it. The presence of Helicobacter generates inflammation
in the stomach tissue.
Many patients are colonized by Helicobacter and do not develop symptoms; however, if
Helicobacter penetrates deeply enough, it will bind to the mucus-secreting cells of the
stomach and disrupt their ability to produce normal mucus. Ultimately, the stomach's
mucus lining is disrupted, acid gains access to the stomach tissue, and burning results.
Ulcers are thus formed. Making matters worse, Helicobacter organisms are able to
stimulate extra acid secretion by the stomach tissue. More burning and more ulcers result,
and soon the patient is experiencing pain, nausea, and/or vomiting. It is unclear what
constitutes a few Helicobacter bacteria sharing the stomach with its host peacefully and
numerous Helicobacter organisms disrupting the stomach lining integrity and causing
disease. It is possible that without additional stomach disease (such as inflammatory bowel
disease) or other factors (stress, anxiety), Helicobacter causes no trouble. there are many
strains and types of Helicobacter, and not all of them cause harm. Helicobacter organisms
are often found in small numbers in normal stomachs.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951472&ind=333&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Helicobacter On Cytology
Impression smears from gastric endoscopic biopsy. Photo
Courtesy Dr. Adam Honeckman.
Some Helicobacter species are also capable of producing toxins, but the role of such
toxins in this disease process is not clear.
Helicobacter seems to be one reason why an animal that has been stable with
inflammatory bowel disease or some other stomach disease might suddenly get much
worse.
It is unclear what constitutes a few Helicobacter bacteria sharing the stomach with its host
peacefully versus numerous Helicobacter organisms disrupting the stomach lining integrity
and causing disease. It is possible that without additional stomach disease (such
as inflammatory bowel disease) or other factors (stress, anxiety), Helicobacter causes no
trouble. Complicating the picture is the fact that there are many strains and types
of Helicobacter and not all of them cause harm. Helicobacter organisms are often found in
small numbers in normal stomachs.
Does Helicobacter Infection Cause Cancer?
In humans, it appears that Helicobacter infection may indeed cause cancer. In people,
Helicobacter infection represents a 400% risk increase for the development of stomach
cancer. Pets, however, get infected with different Helicobacter species, and the same
association with cancer in these species has not been made.
Does My Pet Have Helicobacter Overgrowth?
There are many excellent ways to determine if a pet's chronic gastrointestinal problem is
complicated by Helicobacter infection.
Biopsy
While it is possible to miss Helicobacter if only certain areas of the stomach are colonized,
a biopsy is by far the most accurate test. This method not only detects the infection but
also assesses the degree of inflammation and checks for cancer.
The Rapid Urease Test
Some gastroenterologists will keep a
special broth handy during the biopsy
procedure. A spare tissue sample can be
dropped in the broth and incubated for an
hour. The presence of urease, the enzyme
that creates Helicobacter's protective
bicarbonate layer, induces a color change
in the solution. In this way, Helicobacter
can be detected in an hour rather than
after the several-day periods it takes to
obtain biopsy results.
PCR Testing
This especially sensitive DNA testing can
be used but is only available in a few
centers.
Blood Tests
Antibodies against Helicobacter can be detected, but their levels take months to decline
even after the Helicobacter organism is long gone, limiting the usefulness of such testing.
Breath Testing
A radioisotope-labeled meal is fed, and the patient's breath is tested for Helicobacter
metabolites. This form of testing is easy to use for monitoring the eradication of
Helicobacter, plus it is non-invasive. In humans, Helicobacter eradication is usually
confirmed four to eight weeks after treatment has been completed. With the breath test, a
second biopsy or endoscopy is not needed. Unfortunately, this type of testing is not readily
available for pets.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951472&ind=333&objTypeID=1007 2/3
What is the Treatment?
Treatment protocols generally consist of two or three antibiotics and a medication to
reduce stomach acid production. Numerous medication combinations have been used.
Treatment typically involves two to three weeks of medication use.
Here is a list of medications typically used in the treatment of Helicobacter:
Amoxicillin (an antibiotic)
Tetracycline (an antibiotic)
Pepto-Bismol (the bismuth actually accumulates
in the Helicobacter cell wall and destroys the cell)
Flagyl (an antibiotic)
Omeprazole (an antacid)
Pepcid AC (an antacid)
Clarithromycin (an antibiotic)
Azithromycin (an antibiotic)
Erythromycin (an antibiotic)
Can My Pet Infect Me?
Currently, this is not known. At least one known Helicobacter species is capable of
infecting both humans and cats. Cat ownership does not seem to represent an increased
risk for Helicobacter infection in humans. Transmission of the disease is felt to be through
contact with vomit or fecal matter. When cleaning up after your pet, wear gloves if possible,
and certainly wash your hands thoroughly afterward.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951472&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754159976
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:09 AM Helicobacter Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951472&ind=333&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Hepatitis in Dogs
Stephanie Cruz-Rincon, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Revised: August 24, 2022
Published: August 05, 2020
What is Hepatitis?
Hepatitis is inflammation of the liver. It is a
syndrome - a group of clinical signs or
symptoms - rather than a specific disease,
and it has many causes. Your dog can have
immediate inflammation in their liver called
acute hepatitis or long-term inflammation
called chronic hepatitis. Chronic hepatitis
(CH), also called chronic active hepatitis,
can lead to scar tissue formation and
cirrhosis in the liver. Cirrhosis is extensive,
end-stage scar tissue. Some dogs with acute
hepatitis progress to the chronic form.
Infectious Canine Hepatitis
One disease that causes chronic hepatitis is infectious canine hepatitis (ICH). ICH is
caused by a virus but not the same as the Hepatitis A, B or C viruses that cause disease
in humans; you and your family won’t get sick if your dog is infected. Similarly, The
hepatitis viruses that cause human hepatitis do not affect dogs. ICH is spread through
animal feces, urine, saliva and objects. Since most dogs are vaccinated as puppies
against ICH, it is considered a rare infection. If you have a young puppy or an
unvaccinated dog in your household, they can get ill with this virus. However,
outbreaks sometimes occur, mostly in dogs less than 1-year-old or unvaccinated dogs. An
infected dog may show signs of depression, fever, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain.
Treatment involves supportive care such as fluids and medications to boost liver function;
the latter may include SAMe, milk thistle, ursodiol, and vitamin E.
Causes
Aside from ICH, there are many other causes of hepatitis. Causes of acute hepatitis
include toxins, drugs, viruses, bacteria (particularly leptospirosis), and fungi. On the other
hand, chronic hepatitis is caused by bacteria, viruses, excess copper in the liver, drugs,
and immune system issues. If a cause cannot be determined, this is referred to as
idiopathic hepatitis and is the most common cause. Idiopathic means no cause can be
found.
Age and Breed Predispositions
Any dog can have an acute episode of hepatitis. Chronic hepatitis, on the other hand, is
most common in middle-aged to older dogs; most dogs diagnosed with chronic hepatitis
are 4-10 years old.

8/3/25, 12:10 AM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9758237&ind=334&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Some breeds are suspected to have a genetic predisposition to CH, making them more
likely to develop it. These include the Bedlington Terrier, Doberman pinscher, West
Highland white terrier, Dalmatian, English springer spaniel, American and English cocker
spaniels, Jack Russell terrier, and standard poodle, Great Dane, Labrador retriever, and
others. CH is also more common in females than males.
Signs
Dogs with acute hepatitis often have more severe signs than those with CH. Symptoms
may include anorexia (lack of appetite), vomiting, diarrhea, dehydration, depression, fever,
and jaundice (yellow discoloration of the eyes, gums, and skin), enlarged abdomen and
weight loss. How serious your dog’s symptoms depend on how much liver damage they
have and this may vary from mild to severe. In severe cases, there are signs of bleeding
and bruising. Bleeding can occur inside the body or through any opening of the body, such
as the nose and mouth.
Dogs with chronic hepatitis often appear normal early on. It is often surprising how normal
the dog appears, even with significant progressing disease. This is why it is a good idea to
pay attention to elevations in the liver enzymes (particularly ALT), as there is a better
chance of slowing down the disease the sooner it is detected and appropriate
management begins. As the disease gets worse, common signs are poor appetite,
vomiting, diarrhea, depression, increased thirst and urination, weakness, jaundice, and
weight loss. A small number of dogs have severe signs such as bleeding, incoordination,
and behavior changes. Similar to acute hepatitis, bleeding can occur through any opening
in the body.
Diagnosis
Similar to many illnesses, a thorough history and physical examination from your
veterinarian are crucial to making a diagnosis. Drug history and potential exposure to
toxins are particularly important as these can cause significant liver damage. Some dogs
with hepatitis have increased levels of liver enzymes that can be seen on lab work. These
increases do not have to be large to be important; they may indicate liver damage but can
also be caused by many different diseases.
Elevated liver values are a common abnormality, but they are often non-specific and can
be confusing to pet owners. Not all cases of elevated liver enzymes indicate specific liver
disease. The liver performs many functions and, in some cases, the liver enzymes may
elevate due to problems elsewhere in the body, or simply due to age. It is a good idea to
look into these sooner rather than later, especially if your dog is one of the breeds
predisposed to hepatitis. They may be the only abnormality a dog with chronic hepatitis
has at that time.
To add to the confusion, some dogs with hepatitis can have normal liver enzymes. This
normalcy does not rule out chronic hepatitis: CH can be so severe in some dogs that there
is little functioning liver tissue left to release enzymes, making test results look ‘normal.' If
hepatitis is suspected, your veterinarian may recommend a serum bile acids test
specifically to evaluate liver function. Another diagnostic test is an abdominal ultrasound.
Abnormalities on these tests may strongly suggest hepatitis, but often do not pinpoint a
cause. A liver biopsy is the most accurate way to make a diagnosis.
Treatment
Treating a dog with acute hepatitis involves supportive therapy such as fluids, medications
and antioxidants.
Treating chronic hepatitis has several goals: treat the underlying cause, reduce
inflammation and scarring/cirrhosis, provide supportive care, and treat complications. This
support may involve changing current medications, use of antibiotics, and medication

8/3/25, 12:10 AM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9758237&ind=334&objTypeID=1007 2/3
meant to reduce excess copper. Steroids, and/or other immunosuppressive drugs, may be
used to reduce inflammation if infection is not suspected. Supportive care works to boost
liver function, while treating complications depends on the specific problems.
Your dog may benefit from specific dietary changes depending on their individual condition
and the cause of their chronic hepatitis. Dogs whose chronic hepatitis is associated with
excess copper in the liver should be fed diets reduced in copper. They can also have a
zinc gluconate supplement added to their food which acts to reduce copper levels as well.
Regardless of cause, dogs with chronic hepatitis may benefit from diets with restricted
protein levels. Restricted protein diets are not always necessary however and are only
considered if your dog has evidence of protein intolerance. Your veterinarian will work with
you to determine if your dog needs to be on a protein restricted diet. Another important
dietary factor to consider for a dog with CH is how tasty and nutritious the food is. Dogs
with CH often do not want to or are reluctant to eat. It's important your pet's food is
appetizing to them and has high levels of carbohydrates and moderate levels of fat to
provide them with their necessary calories. There is evidence that fiber may benefit dogs
with liver disease and is another factor to consider increasing in your dog's diet.
Prognosis
Your pet’s prognosis depends on the underlying cause of their hepatitis. In general, acute
hepatitis has a better prognosis than the chronic form. If the liver is not too damaged,
most dogs recover. Some, however, progress to chronic hepatitis.
According to one study, the average survival time with chronic hepatitis was two to three
years, although individual results depend on the condition and response to treatment.
Identification of the liver disease (via biopsies) is the best way to ensure the proper
treatment. The prognosis is much worse if scarring and/or cirrhosis is extensive or blood
clotting test results are abnormal. To ensure the health of your pet, it is important to not
only treat hepatitis as soon as it is diagnosed, but also to look into abnormal test results
such as elevated liver enzymes; these may be early signs of liver issues.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9758237&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160009
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:10 AM Hepatitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9758237&ind=334&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo by Karen James
Hepatozoonosis in Dogs
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: November 20, 2019
Hepatozoonosis is a parasitic infection of dogs
primarily caused by either Hepatozoon canis or
Hepatozoon americanum. The illness is difficult to
treat and can be fatal in dogs showing symptoms.
Both forms are transmitted from ticks and are
debilitating. Without treatment, chronic wasting
begins in either form, which usually ends with
death within 12 months.
Species of Hepatozoon are protozoans, which are
a different kind of infectious organism than
bacteria or viruses. Like ameba, protozoans are
single-celled parasites that live in the
environment. Although both species cause
hepatozoonosis, the disease and recommended
treatment are different.
People cannot be infected by these protozoa.
Transmission and Infection
Ticks get infected by feeding from a host, and then transmit Hepatozoon protozoans to
dogs when the dog ingests them. This is not a disease in which ticks biting the dog make
it sick. The tick becomes infected with protozoans after it has a blood meal from an
infected animal. This can occur by eating birds or rodents with infected ticks attached, or
eating a tick on themselves. Infection does not occur because of a tick bite, and dogs are
not infectious to each other.
Hepatozoon protozoans develop to a certain life stage in the tick to allow for infection of
another animal. Dogs must eat the infected tick in order to become infected.
Concurrent infection, debilitating disease, immunosuppressant drugs, and young age
increase a dog’s chances of becoming infected and having symptoms.
Symptoms of Infection
H. canis and H. americanum have different symptoms, ticks, life cycles, and prevalence.
H. americanum comes from dogs eating Gulf Coast ticks, and the brown dog tick conveys
H. canis. Many dogs have mild symptoms, or none.
When a dog is infected with H. canis, the protozoans reproduce and develop primarily in
organs associated with blood storage (e.g. spleen) or the immune system (e.g. bone
marrow, lymph nodes). You may see your dog not wanting to move around, and he may
have fever, pale gums and skin, and enlarged lymph nodes. Many infected dogs do not
have symptoms. Disease tends to be less severe than with H. americanum. Young dogs
less than 18 months of age are most frequently affected by H. canis.

8/3/25, 12:10 AM Hepatozoonosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9400204&ind=335&objTypeID=1007 1/2
H. americanum protozoans tend to be a far more severe disease that reproduces and
develops in muscles, including the heart. Cysts — thick, protective capsules — can form
around the organisms, resulting in life-long infections. A dog’s immune system tends to
respond more strongly to these protozoans compared to H. canis, leading to severe
reactions. The infection can result in symptoms such as pain in the muscle, bone, and/or
joints. Infected dogs may limp or be unable to walk, seem painful when touched, run a
fever, and lose weight.
Diagnosis
A veterinarian will need to examine the dog to note all the physical abnormalities. Blood
can be drawn to check immune cells, blood cells, and to make sure the internal organs
are working properly. X-rays may help determine the extent of damage and rule out other
diseases. Hepatozoonosis can sometimes be diagnosed by blood tests. Examining blood
under the microscope can also be helpful for diagnosis. In many cases, a biopsy needs to
be taken from infected muscle and examined by a pathologist to determine which
protozoan is responsible for the infection.
Treatment
Treatment is difficult in dogs showing symptoms. Sadly, many dogs cannot be cured.
Dogs infected with Hepatozoon organisms can be treated with medications that will
decrease the severity of the symptoms, but return of symptoms is common. It’s more
difficult to control symptoms in H. americanum than H. canis. Pain medications, blood
transfusions, and nutritional or fluid support such as intravenous fluids, syringe feeding,
and high calorie diets may be needed for dogs with severe symptoms.
Remember, treatment will not cure your dog, but can make him more comfortable and
give him a higher quality of life.
Prevention
No vaccines are available for hepatozoonosis. The best method for prevention is
aggressive, year round tick prevention, as well as keeping your dog from hunting and
eating wild rodents or birds (often easier said than done). Treat the yard for ticks if it does
not freeze in your climate. Remove ticks quickly from your dog to keep him from eating
them.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9400204&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160051
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:10 AM Hepatozoonosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9400204&ind=335&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Two collie puppies in this litter of
five survived herpes. Photo by
Chandra Flaim/VIN.
Herpes Infections in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 11, 2023
Published: July 04, 2005
Solving the Mystery of the Disappearing Litter
Most of us are familiar with herpes viruses because we
have heard of human herpes. Medications to suppress
herpes outbreaks are advertised on television and
educational programs are in place in schools and
communities. People refer to periodically breaking out in
herpes sores, either facial (Herpes I) or genital (Herpes II),
indicating that symptoms are not constant but happen
sporadically. Indeed, herpes is famous for its intermittent
symptoms. Herpesviruses have the ability to “hide” in the
body’s nerve ganglia, where they are safe from the immune
system, periodically emerging and causing visible
lesions. Herpes infection is generally considered to be
permanent, with outbreaks of symptoms associated with
stress.
In fact, our pets must deal with their own herpes viruses. In
cats, herpes is a respiratory virus accounting for nearly half
of feline upper respiratory infections. Feline herpes is
contagious and a common problem wherever cats are
housed in groups.
Canine herpes is more of a reproductive problem than a
respiratory one; in fact, most infected dogs do not appear to
get sick at all or have mild conjunctivitis/upper respiratory
symptoms. It is the unborn and newborn for whom the virus is most serious.
Herpes infection in pregnancy causes resorption of the embryos, abortion of the fetuses,
stillbirth, or death of puppies within a few weeks of life. Transmission occurs by direct
contact (sexual contact will do it but the usual route is simply normal nosing, licking, and
sniffing) between the infected and uninfected dogs. For this reason, a pregnant dog
should be isolated from other dogs for the last three weeks of pregnancy and the first
three weeks after birth. Let’s say that again:
Any pregnant dog should be isolated from other dogs for the last three weeks of
pregnancy and the first three weeks after birth. If she gets infected during this
period, the litter is likely to be lost.
There are two syndromes experienced by puppies, depending on their age at exposure. If
the puppies are infected after the age of three weeks, a kennel cough type of respiratory
infection ensues. This can be serious and can progress to pneumonia given the
vulnerabilities of a puppy so small and young, but overall this syndrome is far better than
what is experienced by much younger puppies.

8/3/25, 12:11 AM Herpes Infections in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952309&ind=336&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Puppies exposed from birth to up to age three weeks develop a painful, rapidly
progressive condition that typically results in death within 48 hours. Affected puppies are
very vocal, and show abdominal bloating, difficult shallow breathing, cold body
temperatures, and weakness. Low platelet counts associated with infection result in
speckles called petechiae, which may or may not be externally visible. The entire litter
may be quickly lost.
The reason why three weeks of age seems to be a critical age is that this is the age when
puppies begin to be able to maintain their own body temperature. The canine herpes virus
depends on a cooler body temperature to replicate, with 95F°/30°C being optimal. A
warmer body temperature greatly hampers the spread of the virus. Keeping the litter cozy
and warm is important in protecting and treating it.
What to do when one of the Puppies Dies Shortly after Birth
The necropsy (autopsy) is the only realistic means of finding out what happened. If you
want to learn if the other litter members are at risk or if the mother dog can safely be bred
again, the dead puppy should be examined.
Place the remains in a zippered plastic food bag and refrigerate until you can
notify your veterinarian. If the placenta is available, it should be included.
Expect the mother dog and remaining littermates to be examined and the dead
puppy to be necropsied.
There are many causes for the loss of
a near-term or newly born litter of
puppies: coronavirus, parvovirus,
toxoplasmosis, brucellosis, umbilical
trauma, genetic disease, etc. Knowing
what to do heavily depends on
knowing what happened. Puppies that
die from canine herpes have
characteristic inclusion bodies in many
tissues that can be seen under the
microscope. Inclusion bodies are
essentially areas of heavy virus
reproduction that are actually visible
and unique in appearance. The presence of herpes inclusion bodies confirms the
diagnosis. Recently a PCR test (a test for herpesviral DNA) has been developed for dogs.
This test is likely to become the diagnostic test of choice in a post-mortem puppy situation.
In many individuals, the aforementioned speckling is on the kidneys. If this finding is
detected, herpes is confirmed and microscopic tissue examination is probably not
necessary.
Prior Exposure of the Mother Dog and Screening Tests
The reason why puppies get into trouble with the herpes virus is twofold: cool body
temperature and lack of protection from their mother. Body temperature can be managed
by keeping the nest area heated but if the mother was never infected, then she has no
antibodies with which to protect her puppies. If she is infected in pregnancy, the litter is
vulnerable or if the litter is exposed before the age of three weeks (from their mom or from
any other visiting dog) again, they are vulnerable.
Herpes is an extremely common canine virus, and most social dogs who meet and greet
other dogs will get infected. The mother dog who was exposed/infected a long time ago
will have antibodies and her puppies should be protected regardless of her contact with
other dogs. Herpes, however, is by no means the only infectious agent puppies must

8/3/25, 12:11 AM Herpes Infections in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952309&ind=336&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Photo by Chandra Flaim/VIN
contend with so the recommendation for isolation stands even if herpes is not the virus in
question. We do not want infectious agents attacking the litter before or after birth,
regardless.
So should you test the mother during pregnancy? It may not be necessary if you are going
to isolate the mother and litter anyway.
Should you test her at breeding? Probably not because her infection status could change
by the time she gets to the final three weeks of pregnancy.
Should you test the male? If he is being used as a stud dog with any regularity, he has
most likely been exposed already.
The test that is used to determine whether a dog is naive (never exposed or infected) or
has prior exposure is a blood test for herpes antibodies. The idea is that if there are
antibodies, the virus was there at some point to generate them. The ability of an infected
dog to maintain antibodies against canine herpes is variable. Some infected dogs show no
antibodies after a couple of months have passed since infection, and others have antibody
levels persisting for years. This makes meaningful screening a challenge; it is safest to
simply stick to the isolation of the mother dog and litter.
Saving the Infected Litter
Canine herpes is very bad news for puppies less
than three weeks of age. Often there is nothing
that can be done to stop the sweep of this lethal
virus. This does not keep us from fighting,
however. If a seropositive nursing female dog is
available (i.e. a nursing mother who is known to
have been previously exposed), the litter at risk
can be moved to her. Alternatively, serum from a
recovered female dog can be separated and
injected into the puppies as a source of antiherpes antibodies. Warming the puppies may
help as the virus cannot survive at body
temperature. Antiviral medications such as
Acyclovir may help.
Prevention
As noted, canine herpes prefers a cooler body
temperature of around 95F°/30°C for maximum
replication. Keeping the nest box warm enough
that the puppies are consistently warmer is helpful
but one should note that the virus cannot live in
an environment where the temperature drops below 68°F/20°C. Herpes is readily killed by
common household disinfectants.
Be sure the litter nurses from the mother during the first day after birth so as to maximize
intake of colostrum (the special antibody-rich first milk). Isolate the mother and pups as
described above. In Europe, a vaccine is available for use during canine pregnancy (one
dose at the time of breeding and a second six to seven weeks later, to be repeated with
each pregnancy) but it is not available in the U.S.
Herpes is most dangerous to puppies when they are infected during pregnancy or shortly
after delivery. Once the mother has been virus-exposed, subsequent pregnancies should
be unaffected as she will have made enough antibodies to keep the virus in check. Her
antibodies will keep her from re-shedding the virus to the puppies and will transfer to her
milk to provide some protection to the puppies. While this means the mother dog should
not be able to transmit the virus to her puppies, they can still be infected by other visiting

8/3/25, 12:11 AM Herpes Infections in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952309&ind=336&objTypeID=1007 3/4
dogs and the litter and mother must be isolated. Further, a mother dog with prior exposure
may be able to re-shed the virus if she is stressed enough for the virus to break through
her immunity.
To summarize:
Canine herpes only causes symptoms in unborn or newborn puppies and they
usually do not survive the infection.
The mother dog will not appear sick or may show mild cold/respiratory
symptoms only.
Problems classically occur when an uninfected female becomes infected during
pregnancy. Females infected long before pregnancy should not lose their litters
to herpes as long the puppies are properly isolated.
Herpes is a common canine infection and is spread not only by sexual contact
but through mouth and nose fluids.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952309&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160113
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:11 AM Herpes Infections in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952309&ind=336&objTypeID=1007 4/4

In people, the disease is sometimes referred to as Cave
disease because people get infected after hiking in caves that
contain high amounts of bat droppings. Photo by
Depositphotos
Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: May 24, 2021
Histoplasmosis is a fungal infection of
animals and people, caused by
Histoplasma capsulatum. The fungus
lives in the environment, growing best in
warm, moist organic matter that is rich in
nitrogen. Common sources include bird
and bat feces left on the ground. In
people, the disease is sometimes
referred to as Cave disease because
people get infected after hiking in caves
that contain high amounts of bat
droppings.
In the U.S., most infections are reported
around the Ohio, Mississippi, and
Missouri River valleys.
Getting Infected
Animals and people become infected
after breathing in the fungus. Cats tend
to be more vulnerable to infection than dogs. Once the Histoplasma fungi are inhaled,
they primarily reproduce in the lungs, then spread to other organs, such as the eyes,
gastrointestinal (GI) tract, skin, lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
Occasionally, the bones, joints, and nervous system are affected too. In some situations,
Histoplasma will reproduce in the GI tract of dogs, with or without the lungs being
involved.
Cats’ and dogs’ immune systems fight the Histoplasma fungi once they arrive in the body.
Healthy animals may be able to fight the infection well enough to avoid any signs or
symptoms, eventually ridding themselves of histoplasmosis completely. Animals with a
weak immune system may have a harder time controlling Histoplasma, sometimes
developing severe, life-threatening disease that is difficult to cure. Even animals that are
treated successfully can relapse, resulting in a recurrence of their clinical signs and
symptoms.
Histoplasmosis Signs and Symptoms
Clinical signs and symptoms often include poor appetite, fever, losing weight, and/or
acting tired. In dogs, GI symptoms are common, especially diarrhea or loose stool and
straining to defecate or poop. Trouble breathing, breathing rapidly, coughing, and a runny
nose may be seen in cats and dogs when the lungs are affected. Blindness or trouble
seeing, squinting, and swollen eyes (conjunctivitis) are common signs when the eyes are
involved. Other signs and symptoms will be related to the organ systems that the disease

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10267110&ind=337&objTypeID=1007 1/3
spreads to, such as pale gums, yellow tinge to the skin and eyes (icterus), skin ulcers or
wounds that ooze, swellings below the skin (that could be enlarged lymph nodes or
draining tracts of infection).
Diagnosis starts with a thorough physical examination by the veterinarian, who will note
the physical and clinical issues and try to determine which organs are affected. Lab work
will be performed, such as a serum biochemistry test and a complete blood count (CBC),
to gauge internal organ health and determine how the immune system is handling the
disease. Common findings on a biochemistry test include hypoalbuminemia, or low levels
of a type of protein called albumin, which can occur when the GI tract or liver is badly
affected. CBC findings include anemia, a condition is caused by low levels of red blood
cells in the blood, and thrombocytopenia, which is low levels of platelets in the blood. Both
conditions can potentially cause pale gums and a decreased activity level.
Tests that confirm histoplasmosis include cytology or histopathology to view the fungal
organism in tissues and/or fluids. Antigen and/or antibody blood tests are also commonly
performed, which confirm the infection based on the body’s immune responses. Other
tests that may be needed are X-rays to assess damage to the lungs and an ultrasound to
view damage to internal organs in the belly.
Treatment
Treating Histoplasma infections is costly and time-consuming. Many pets need to be
treated for more than 6 months. Common medications used are antifungals, usually
itraconazole, fluconazole, or amphotericin B. These medications can sometimes case
unfortunate side effects such as vomiting, poor appetite, loose stool/diarrhea, or kidney
problems. The pet will need to have frequent check ups and blood tests to make certain
the medication is working and side effects are not problematic.
Symptomatic treatment, meaning treatment for the individual clinical signs and symptoms,
include IV fluids for dehydration, antibiotics if secondary bacterial infections occur, and
oxygen therapy and other treatments for difficulty when breathing. Seriously sick pets that
have poor appetites may also need help with eating, such as a feeding tube.
After finishing treatment, check-ups and blood tests will need to be repeated periodically
to make sure the infection is still gone and that the pet is not going to relapse. If relapse
occurs and symptoms return, the pet will need to start antifungal medications again.
Prognosis
Histoplasmosis is a dangerous disease. Pets that get infected but don’t show symptoms
will likely be able to rid themselves of infection on their own. However, most sick,
symptomatic pets will die if not treated. Many sick pets that undergo treatment have a fair
chance of improving, depending on which organs are involved. For example, cats and
dogs with only lung involvement generally improve with treatment, whereas those with
other organ involvement may not survive treatment. If a pet with severe disease or
multiple organs involved does survive, they may only survive for a few months to a few
years.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10267110&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160137
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10267110&ind=337&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Histoplasmosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10267110&ind=337&objTypeID=1007 3/3


Teeth of the Adult Hookworm
Photo courtesy of CDC / Dr. Mae
Soil becomes infested with worms from infected
stool. Cats and dogs can ingest worm larvae (young
worms) from soil, and the cycle continues.
Hookworms in Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 07, 2025
Published: September 08, 2003
Hookworms (Ancylostoma caninum,
Ancylostoma braziliense, Uncinaria
stenocephala) are one of the classical
groups of internal parasites of puppies,
the others being roundworms,
tapeworms, and coccidia. Hookworm
infection has several features that are of
interest to dog caretakers.
Hookworms (particularly
Ancylostoma caninum) suck
blood.
Hookworms can be transmitted
to unborn pups.
Hookworms can infect humans.
Before elaborating on these aspects of
hookworm infection, it is important to
understand the life cycle of the hookworm, encompassing how infection happens, how the
parasite lives, etc.
Hookworm Life Cycle
The adult hookworm lives in the small intestine
of its host, where it hangs on to the intestinal
wall using its six sharp teeth. This means that,
like other parasitic worms, it is bathed in
intestinal contents, but while other worms share
the host's food by absorbing it directly through
their skin, hookworms feed by drinking their
host's blood. The adult worm lives and mates
within the host’s intestine, and ultimately, the
female worm produces eggs. Hookworm eggs
are released into the intestinal contents and
passed into the world mixed in with the host's
stool.
The egg hatches in the environment and
develops from a first-stage larva (the hatchling)
to a second-stage larva and, finally, a thirdstage larva, which is ready to infect a new host.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 1/6
The larva can infect its new host in several ways. One way is to penetrate the host's skin
directly through the feet or belly or whatever part of the skin is touching the ground.
Another way for the larva to gain entry to the new host is to be in soil that is licked and
swallowed by the host as it cleans itself. The pet can be infected by contaminated dirt or
by eating an infected animal. This could be a prey animal, such as a rodent, or an insect,
such as a cockroach.
Once the larvae are inside the host, they make their way to the intestine, where some
worms simply stay and mature into adulthood. Other individuals are bolder, tunneling out
of the intestine and migrating to the lung tissue. In the lung, the larvae develop into fourthstage larvae, and when they are ready they break out of the lung, climb up the trachea
(windpipe), get coughed up into the throat, and are swallowed into the esophagus. Once
back in the intestine, these well-traveled worms will complete their maturation to
adulthood, rejoining any friends they had that never left the intestine on a migration.
Not all the worms that begin this treacherous migration complete it. As they emerge from
one tissue to move on to the next, some fall into a state of arrest where they go dormant
and encyst. These larvae remain inactive, periodically emerging and continuing their
migration. Only hookworms in the intestinal tract are vulnerable to deworming
medications; those in various stages of migration are protected and very difficult to kill.
It is worth repeating that the host is not always a pet. Other vertebrates, such as rodents
and birds, can pick up hookworm larvae from the soil. If your pet eats an infected rodent
or bird, your pet will become infected just the same as if the infection came directly from
the soil.
Hookworms Suck Blood
Hookworm infection can be looked at as a natural check in the canine population, as it is
frequently lethal to young puppies. A young puppy is growing, and growth includes making
enough new blood to serve not only its current oxygen needs but what is required for
growth as well. Growing requires a tremendous red blood cell production from the puppy’s
bone marrow, yet in the hookworm-infected puppy, this process is being sabotaged by
numerous tiny vampires within. The puppy may effectively bleed to death.
Infected puppies are commonly pale, weak, and have long-standing deficiencies. They
may or may not have diarrhea.
Treatment involves deworming with one of numerous products. Some active ingredients
include:
Mebendazole (oral)
Milbemycin (oral)
Moxidectin (topical or injectable)
Fenbendazole (oral)
Pyrantel pamoate (oral)
Many newer flea products include one of these dewormers so as to regularly deworm
dogs and older puppies. Some of these are suitable for very young puppies seeing as the
Companion Animal Parasite Council recommends beginning deworming at age two weeks
and continuing to do so every two weeks until age eight weeks when one of the regular
monthly products can be started.
Simply killing the worms will not be sufficient to save the life of a severely affected
puppy. Like any other blood loss, a blood transfusion may be needed to keep the puppy
alive until it can replace its own lost red blood cells. An iron supplement is frequently
needed as well.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Most puppies will become infected with hookworms
by drinking their mother's contaminated milk.
Summary: Adult worms live by sucking
blood from the intestine. The host passes
their eggs into the environment, where a
new host picks them up. The developing
larvae may migrate widely through the
new host's body before settling down to
complete their maturation.
Hookworm Transmission to Unborn Pups
Infection of a very young puppy can occur in
two ways not addressed above.
Typically, an infected mother dog will have
encysted larvae all around her body.
Throughout the adult dog's life, some larvae will
awaken, break out of their cysts, and complete
their migration to the GI tract.
Pregnancy hormones, unfortunately, serve as
little wake-up calls to encysted hookworm
larvae only this time, the little worms migrate to
the unborn puppies and to the mammary gland.
This means that most puppies will become
infected by drinking their mother's contaminated
milk. If this is not enough to infect the entire
litter, others will become infected from the soil of
their own nest, which will quickly become
contaminated with the stool of their infected
litter mates.
Ask your veterinarian about this method if you
are contemplating breeding a female dog.
Can Transmission From the Mother Be
Prevented?
The answer is yes but daily deworming is
required through the second half of pregnancy and into the nursing period. Regular single
deworming will not be effective in protecting the litter. A specific protocol using
fenbendazole (Panacur®) is effective in preventing both roundworm and hookworm
infections in unborn puppies.
Female dogs using Proheart6 or Proheart12 (injectable moxidectin) for heartworm
prevention are believed to pass fewer hookworm larvae onto their pups.
Hookworms Can Infect Human Beings
Contaminated soil is an important hookworm source when it comes to the human disease
called cutaneous larva migrans. Running barefoot through the park or beach may seem
pleasant but if the soil has been contaminated with canine fecal matter, the eager infective
larvae may be waiting to penetrate your skin.
Hookworm infection in the skin is intensely itchy but usually treatable. Local restrictions on
bringing dogs to beaches and the strict clean-up laws reflect concern for hookworm (and
roundworm) infection in people.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Walking with no shoes in areas with infested soil can
allow hookworm larvae to penetrate the skin, leading
to infections in humans.
Humans can also become infected by eating
improperly washed vegetables that may harbor
contaminated soil. Humans have been found
with actual hookworm intestinal infections. This
can be a challenging diagnosis, but the good
news is that it is treated fairly easily when
discovered.
For additional information, see the Centers for
Disease Control and Protection's (CDC)
hookworm fact sheet.
Decontaminating the Environment
Many people are concerned about
decontaminating a backyard or property that
has housed an infected dog. Unfortunately,
there are no guaranteed treatments for
eliminating hookworms from the soil at this
time, and this needs to be researched more
fully. The good news is that unlike roundworms,
which are extremely hardy in the environment,
hookworm eggs deplete their energy reserves
in a few months and die. Further, hookworm
eggs do not survive freezing temperatures.
The most important thing in fighting hookworms
(other than your pet’s dewormer medication) is
picking up your pet’s waste in the yard quickly
after your pet eliminates. This can help stop the
hookworm life cycle, hopefully keeping your pet
from reinfecting themselves, and infecting other pets or humans. Keeping land around
your home mowed, with yard waste picked up can make cleaning up after your pets
easier.
In some areas, pest control professionals may also treat your lawn for hookworms.
It is important for all of your human family members to not dig up, garden, or play in
potentially contaminated soil or walk without shoes in your yard where your pet eliminates
while they are being treated for hookworms.
Preventing Future Infections
The Companion Animal Parasite Council recommends that dogs be dewormed monthly,
starting at age eight weeks. In most areas of the U.S., heartworm products are needed
monthly to protect against heartworm disease and most (but not all) heartworm
preventives will also prevent hookworm infection. Alternatively, tablets or liquids can be
given separately. The same products listed above as treatments are also preventives.
Explore products for heartworm prevention that also work against other parasitic worms.
Resistant Hookworms
The influx of retired racing greyhounds into the pet population has brought with it resistant
populations of hookworms. In 2020, it was reported that most, if not all, racing greyhounds
are coming off the track infected with hookworm infections that do not respond to the
usual medications. As these dogs mingle with other canine pets, resistant hookworm
populations have spread.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 4/6
When a hookworm infection seems stubborn, a special test can be performed. This test is
called a Fecal Egg Count Reduction Test, which compares egg counts in fecal samples
before and 10-14 days or so after treatment (with the product that is believed not to have
worked). Counting eggs before and after treatment gives a better idea of whether the
hookworm infection is truly resistant.
A special laboratory may be needed to run this type of testing as it is more commonly
done in livestock where resistant parasites have been a long-standing farming issue. The
goal of therapy becomes not clearing the infection, but clearing the clinical signs and
maintaining as low an egg count as possible. Testing is done using pyrantel,
fenbendazole, and milbemycin oxime in the hope of finding an effective product. An egg
count reduction of greater than 95% is considered effective. An egg count reduction of
less than 75% is considered ineffective, and a combination of multiple dewormers will be
needed monthly.
Of all the dewormers to which hookworms are generally considered vulnerable,
moxidectin is probably the newest, and as long as the dog has not been previously treated
with this product, there is a good chance that a combination of dewormers will be effective
as long as moxidectin is included. That said, moxidectin-resistant hookworms most
certainly exist.
Keep in mind that hookworm larvae encyst throughout an infected dog's body and "leak"
into the intestine periodically as they mature. There is no way to clear these encysted
dormant hookworms and they cannot be addressed until they make it back to the
intestinal tract. There is no way to distinguish an old infection stemming from migrating
worms from an infection with resistant hookworms. Of course, a resistant hookworm
infection may lead to the migration of resistant worms into the intestine theoretically for a
dog's entire life.
Feline Hookworms
There are two species of hookworms in cats: Ancylostoma tubaeforme and Ancylostoma
braziliense, the former being the most aggressive bloodsucker. The story is pretty much
the same for cats as for dogs with a few exceptions:
Kittens cannot be infected by nursing. Cats are generally infected by larvae
invading the skin or by eating an infected prey animal, although infection
through the skin from the ground can also occur.
Both dogs and cats can be infected by eating a vertebrate host, such as a
rodent, but it is important not to forget the cockroach. A scuttling bug can be a
tempting toy for a cat in particular, and if eaten, the cockroach can transmit
hookworm larvae it is carrying. A cockroach can also infect dogs.
The Companion Animal Parasite Control Council recommends deworming
kittens beginning at age two weeks with pyrantel pamoate and continuing
deworming every two weeks through age eight weeks. After that, a monthly
deworming is recommended (easily combined with a flea product). The indooronly lifestyle will greatly lessen the need for this level of parasite protection,
however.
There are numerous products approved for the treatment of feline hookworm
infection: ivermectin, milbemycin oxime, emodepside (the active ingredient in
Profender®), selamectin, and moxidectin.
See a chart of heartworm preventives that also protect against hookworms.
Hookworms are significant parasites in both dogs and cats and constitute a human hazard
as well. Very young pets are at the highest risk for blood loss so it is important to deworm
regularly. If you have further questions or concerns about hookworms, remember your
veterinarian is always there to see that you get the answers you need.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 5/6
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951969&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160161
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:12 AM Hookworms in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951969&ind=338&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats
Tony Johnson, DVM, DACVECC
Published: October 05, 2021
Uterine disease in dogs and cats is
often influenced by the hormone
progesterone, which prepares a
female for pregnancy and also helps
the mother maintain a pregnancy.
However, sometimes things don’t go
as planned. One such event is when
the uterus, or one of its horns,
becomes filled one of several
different types of fluid, and the effects
can be relatively simple or substantial
enough for an emergency
hysterectomy to prevent death.
After a pet is no longer in heat, high
levels of the hormone progesterone
remain for nearly two months, and
that high level of progesterone causes the uterine lining to thicken so as to be ready for
pregnancy. Progesterone also suppresses the uterus’s immune function. If there is no
pregnancy after several cycles, the uterine lining keeps getting thicker until eventually
some cysts form inside the lining, a syndrome called cystic endometrial hyperplasia.
Those cysts in the thickened lining leak fluid into the uterus.
The first stage of that fluid buildup is hydrometra. Unfortunately, two of the three stages do
not have any significant clinical signs, so the pet owner is unaware that there is a medical
problem.
A fluid-filled uterus has three stages called hydrometra, mucometra, or pyometra:
Hydrometra – watery fluid
Mucometra – fluid with mucous
Pyometra – pus (white blood cells and bacteria)
In hydrometra and mucometra, the fluid is sterile and there is no infection. Only pyometra
is an infection, which occurs when bacteria crawl up the vagina through the cervix and into
the uterus, causing a risk of developing endotoxemia (toxins in the bloodstream) and
sepsis (in which the body's response to an infection damages its own tissues) that are
generally introduced by uterine disease. In pyometra, the uterus sometimes ruptures,
which releases large amounts of pus and dead tissue into the abdomen.
Discovering hydrometra and mucometra is important: the conditions lead to decreased
fertility and likely increase the risk of developing more severe uterine disease.

8/3/25, 12:13 AM Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10504820&ind=339&objTypeID=1007 1/2
These conditions are more common in countries or areas where it is not typical practice to
spay or neuter healthy dogs. They are not uncommon in sexually intact animals,
especially in older females.
Radiography (X-rays) may detect uterine enlargement, but an ultrasound can tell if there is
fluid in the uterus and may also indicate the type of fluid as well as rule out pregnancy. A
dog with pyometra may be quite sick, have a bloated belly, vaginal discharge, a poor
appetite, and may be vomiting or drinking far too much water. Blood tests can detect
infection and other underlying organ problems.
Treatment
Medical management sometimes involves using a drug called dinoprost (Lutalyse) to
clean out the uterine contents; it is used to induce labor and the same contractions as
occur in labor help eject the excess fluid. Sometimes vaginal infusion of warm saline can
help empty the uterus.
While any stage of the first two conditions can be treated medically, they will recur. They
will not resolve on their own and are a risk. Spaying is the only permanent fix.
Pyometra generally occurs in middle-aged to older female dogs in the six weeks following
heat. The uterus fills with pus, bacteria, dying tissue, and toxins; at some point the uterus
dies, releasing all of that dangerous material into the abdomen. It is a life-threatening
emergency. A dog or cat with pyometra must be surgically spayed immediately (after
stabilization) or she will die.
Oddly enough, the easiest one to fix is pyometra: treatment is a single surgery, despite
being a bit more complex than a regular spay, and some antibiotics. Given that it’s
otherwise fatal, it’s a good thing that the pet will have signs so that you know something is
going on. Hydrometra and mucometra can be slow to respond to the dinoprost that lowers
progesterone – sometimes taking a few months - and thus take much longer to treat than
a surgical fix.
Pyometra is one of the main reasons for preventive spays. Removing the uterus is the
only way to prevent hydrometra, mucometra, and pyometra.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10504820&pid=19239
929fb177-7755-43a8-a3d8-e119850d5b16.1754160185
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/3/25, 12:13 AM Hydrometra, Mucometra, and Pyometra in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10504820&ind=339&objTypeID=1007 2/2
The risk of contracting canine influenza is greater at
places where dogs gather, such as competitions,
boarding, dog parks, and day care. Photo by Mary
Buck.
Influenza Strains in Dogs
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA); J. Scott Weese, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: November 24, 2022
Published: April 17, 2015
Just like people, dogs can be affected by
different strains of influenza A, a highly
contagious respiratory virus. While dogs can
sporadically become infected with influenza
strains from other species (including human
influenza viruses), canine influenza viruses are
strains of influenza A that are host-adapted for
dogs and spread effectively between dogs.
There are two main strains of canine influenza
known to affect dogs internationally. H3N8 was
identified in the early 2000s but has rarely been
identified in recent years. The main current
concern is H3N2, a strain of influenza that
originated in Asia and was introduced to North
America multiple times through imported dogs.
H3N2 canine influenza is different from human
and swine H3N2 influenza viruses that are in
circulation.
Where have cases been reported and how
prevalent is it?
While the flu strain H3N2 has been identified
sporadically in Canada and Europe, it persists in Asia and the US causing sporadic
disease and some regional outbreaks. Influenza activity tends to be unpredictable, with
few cases identified for prolonged periods of time, then numerous outbreaks in many
regions. Outbreaks are most commonly associated with kennels, shows, and other
situations where numerous dogs have close contact. H3N2 canine influenza has also
been found in other countries. Overall, canine influenza is a rare cause of respiratory
disease but is important because it can cause large outbreaks.
What are the signs?
Signs can range from inapparent infection (no clinical signs) to mild upper respiratory tract
infection to pneumonia. Most often, infected dogs develop a cough. They may also be
lethargic and have reduced appetite and a fever. Sneezing and discharge from the eyes
and/or nose may also be observed. These signs are no different than those from other
causes of canine respiratory disease complex, more commonly referred to as ‘kennel
cough’.
In a minority of infections, more severe disease can occur, either from more severe
influenza infection or because of secondary bacterial pneumonia. These dogs can
develop high fevers (104⁰F - 106⁰F, 40⁰C - 41⁰C; normal is 101⁰F - 102⁰F, 38⁰ - 39⁰C) and
have clinical signs of pneumonia, such as increased respiratory rates and effort.

8/4/25, 11:17 AM Influenza Strains in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6726102&ind=340&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Fatal cases of pneumonia resulting from infection with influenza have been reported in
dogs, but the fatality rate is less than 1-2 percent. Most dogs recover in two to three
weeks.
How is canine influenza transmitted?
Influenza is transmitted mainly through direct contact between dogs and contact with
respiratory secretions. Transmission via droplets and aerosols may also occur. Dogs can
be infectious about one day before they seem sick. They are probably most contagious to
other dogs shortly before and for the first couple of days of illness. Dogs with subclinical
infections (dogs that are infected but don’t get sick) can also transmit the virus.
When should I see the veterinarian and what are common treatments?
The need to seek veterinary care is most dependent on the severity of the disease, not
whether or not influenza is the cause. There are no specific treatments for influenza, and
most dogs do not need special diagnostic testing or treatment. Sometimes, medications to
control cough are needed. In a small percentage of cases, antibiotics may be needed to
treat secondary bacterial pneumonia or diagnostic testing might be required to evaluate
more severe diseases.
While there are no specific treatments, knowing whether a dog has influenza can be
important for infection control, identifying the cause of outbreaks, assessing vaccination
requirements, and assisting with disease control measures. A dog living in an area where
outbreaks are being reported should be considered to have canine flu until proven
otherwise. Testing to confirm influenza may be most useful when trying to identify a group
(e.g., kennel, show) problem rather than directing specific treatment for the dog
Veterinary care should be sought if there are any signs of moderate to severe disease
(e.g., difficulty breathing, uncontrollable coughing, severe lethargy, or anorexia). Canine
flu is very contagious, so clinics might request that you come in through a separate
entrance. Dogs with severe disease can require hospitalization with oxygen and fluid
therapy, and testing such as chest radiographs (X-rays) to determine whether pneumonia
is present.
The very young and seniors (who may have compromised respiratory systems or
concurrent diseases associated with age) may be more likely to have severe signs of
illness.
How is a diagnosis made?
Influenza is usually diagnosed by swabbing the nose or throat and PCR testing. Viral PCR
tests (polymerase chain reaction tests) use technology to detect the genetic material of
viruses. These can help your veterinarian to diagnose the cause of illness and determine
the best treatment for your pet.
Should my dog be vaccinated against influenza?
There is now a vaccine that will protect against both H3N2 and H3N8 strains, as well as a
vaccine that is just for H3N2. A booster is required two to four weeks later, and dogs
should be revaccinated with one dose every year. It can be used in healthy dogs and
puppies over 7 weeks of age. As with most infectious respiratory disease viruses, the
vaccine does not protect completely against or eliminate the virus, but reduces how ill
your dog can be with it as well as decreases your dog’s ability to transmit the virus to
other dogs.
As with human flu shots, a vaccine for one strain doesn’t help prevent another strain. The
existing vaccine for H3N8 does not prevent H3N2. The vaccine for H3N2 does not protect
against H3N8.
A regular ‘kennel cough’ vaccination will not prevent influenza.

8/4/25, 11:17 AM Influenza Strains in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6726102&ind=340&objTypeID=1007 2/3
To decide whether or not your dog should be vaccinated for either strain or for both, talk to
your veterinarian about the likelihood of any dog being exposed in influenza (both where
you live and areas you might visit with your dog) and the risk of severe disease should
they become infected (e.g. seniors, pregnant dogs, dogs with compromised immune
systems or underlying respiratory or heart disease).
Can influenza be prevented?
The best preventative measures are to limit or prevent exposure as lifestyle plays a factor
in the risk of getting either strain of flu. Dogs that go to daycare, dog parks, performance
competitions, dog shows, training classes, or boarding kennels have a higher risk. Dogs
that spend most of their time at home or rarely encounter other dogs have a lower risk.
People with dogs that might have influenza (or any similar respiratory disease) should
keep them away from other dogs. Don’t let your dog socialize with coughing dogs.
Can people or cats be infected by dogs?
There is no evidence that people can get canine influenza. However, it is theoretically
possible that dog-human transmission could occur or that canine influenza viruses could
recombine with human or other species’ flu viruses to create a novel strain. Overall, the
risks are very low. Owners of infected dogs do not need to isolate from their dogs.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6726102&pid=19239
d531be27-8a97-4361-8aee-7771ffe7c33a.1754286441
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:17 AM Influenza Strains in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6726102&ind=340&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Dog with Kennel Cough
Graphic courtesy MarVistaVet.
Kennel Cough in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 24, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
(Also called Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease, CIRD, or Infectious
Tracheobronchitis)
What is it?
Kennel cough is an infectious bronchitis of dogs
characterized by a harsh, hacking cough that most
people describe as sounding like “something stuck in my
dog’s throat.” This bronchitis may not last long and be
mild enough not to need any treatment, or it may
progress to life-threatening pneumonia depending on
which infectious agents are involved and the patient's
immunological strength. An uncomplicated kennel cough
runs a week or two and entails frequent fits of coughing
in a patient who otherwise feels active and normal.
Uncomplicated cases do not involve fever or listlessness, just lots of coughing. Happily,
most cases are uncomplicated. Appetite loss, labored breathing, and reduced activity can
indicate progression to pneumonia. Again, it depends on the vigor of the patient versus
the vigor of the infectious organisms.
Numerous organisms (some of which may be prevented by vaccination) may be involved
in a case of kennel cough; it would be unusual for only one agent to be involved.
Infections with the following organisms frequently occur concurrently to create a case of
kennel cough:
Bordetella bronchiseptica (bacteria)
Parainfluenza virus
Adenovirus type 2
Canine distemper virus
Canine influenza virus
Canine herpesvirus (very young puppies)
Mycoplasma canis (a single-cell organism that is neither virus nor bacterium)
Canine reovirus
Canine respiratory coronavirus.
The classical combination for uncomplicated kennel cough is infection with
parainfluenza or adenovirus type 2 in combination with Bordetella
bronchiseptica. Infections involving the distemper virus, Mycoplasma species, or canine
influenza are more likely to progress to pneumonia, and pneumonia can readily result in
any dog or puppy that is sufficiently young, stressed, or debilitated.
Not sure what a Coughing Dog sounds like?

8/4/25, 11:18 AM Kennel Cough in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951478&ind=341&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Mucociliary Escalator
Graphic courtesy MarVistaVet
Dogs can make assorted respiratory sounds. Usually, a cough is recognizable but it is
important to be aware of another sound called a reverse sneeze. The reverse sneeze is
often mistaken for a cough, a choking fit, sneezing, retching, or even for some sort of
respiratory distress. In fact, the reverse sneeze is more like the sound of clearing the
throat, and usually stems from a post-nasal drip or “tickle in the throat.”
It is considered normal, especially for small dogs, and only requires attention if it is felt to
be “excessive". The point here is to know a cough when you hear one. A cough can be dry
or productive, meaning it is followed by a gag, swallowing motion, and the production of
foamy mucus (not to be confused with vomiting). Here are some videos that might help.
Coughing Dog (with Productive Cough): Dixon has kennel cough
Note: People who have viewed this video have compared it to what their own dog
is doing, and concluded their dog has kennel cough. This video is meant to
demonstrate coughing in general. It is important to note that there are many
causes of coughing, and the nature of the cough does not generally reflect on its
cause.
Reverse Sneezing Dog: Maggie reverse sneezes
      
How Infection Occurs
An infected dog sheds infectious bacteria and/or viruses in respiratory secretions. These
secretions become aerosolized and float in the air, where they can be inhaled by a healthy
dog. Obviously, crowded housing and suboptimal ventilation play important roles in the
likelihood of transmission but organisms may also be transmitted on toys, food bowls, or
other objects.
The normal
respiratory
tract has
substantial
safeguards
against
invading
infectious
agents.
Probably the
most important
of these is
what is called
the mucociliary
escalator. This safeguard consists of tiny hair-like structures called cilia that protrude from
the cells lining the respiratory tract and extend into a coat of mucus above them. The cilia
beat in a coordinated fashion through the lower and more watery mucus layer called the
sol. A thicker mucus layer called the gel floats on top of the sol. Debris, including
infectious agents, gets trapped in the sticky gel and the cilia move them upward toward
the throat where the collection of debris and mucus may be coughed up and/or
swallowed.
The mucociliary escalator is damaged by the following:
shipping stress
crowding stress
heavy dust exposure
cigarette smoke exposure

8/4/25, 11:18 AM Kennel Cough in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951478&ind=341&objTypeID=1007 2/5
infectious agents (as listed previously)
cold temperature
poor ventilation.
Without this, a fully functional mucociliary escalator or invading bacteria, especially
Bordetella bronchiseptica, the chief agent of kennel cough, may simply march down the
airways unimpeded.
Bordetella bronchiseptica organisms have some tricks of their own as well:
They can bind directly to cilia, rendering them unable to function within 3 hours
of first contact.
They secrete substances that disable the immune cells normally responsible for
consuming and destroying bacteria.
Because it is common for Bordetella to be accompanied by at least one other infectious
agent (such as one of the viruses listed below), kennel cough is a complex of infections
rather than infection by one agent.
Classically, dogs get infected when they are kept in a crowded situation with poor air
circulation and lots of warm air (i.e., a boarding kennel, vaccination clinic, obedience
class, local park, animal shelter, animal hospital waiting room, or grooming parlor). In
reality, most causes of coughing that begin acutely in dogs are due to infectious causes
and usually represent some form of kennel cough.
The incubation period is two to 14 days. Dogs are typically sick for one to two
weeks. Infected dogs shed Bordetella organisms for one to three months
following infection.
How is a Diagnosis Made?
A coughing dog with poor appetite, fever, and/or listlessness should be evaluated for
pneumonia.
Usually, the history of exposure to a crowd of dogs within the proper time frame, plus
typical examination findings (coughing dog that otherwise feels well) is adequate to make
the diagnosis. Radiographs show bronchitis and are particularly helpful in determining if
there is a complicated pneumonia.
Recently, PCR (polymerase chain reaction) panels have become available in many
reference laboratories. Using technology to amplify the presence of DNA in a swab, the
lab is able to test for most of the kennel cough infectious agents listed. This knowledge is
helpful in guiding therapy and understanding expectations.
How is Kennel Cough Treated?
An uncomplicated case of kennel cough will go away by itself. Cough suppressants can
improve patient comfort while the infection is resolving. The dog should be clearly
improved, if not recovered, after about a week. That said, several infectious agents in the
kennel cough complex are more intense and can cause minor bronchitis to progress to
pneumonia, which is a potentially life-threatening disease. Given this possibility, antibiotics
are frequently prescribed to kennel cough patients to prevent or curtail pneumonia before
it warrants hospitalization.
It is important to distinguish an uncomplicated case of kennel cough from one complicated
by pneumonia for obvious reasons. The uncomplicated cases will not have a fever or
appetite loss, nor will they be listless. As mentioned, they will seem normal except for
coughing. Dogs with pneumonia appear sick.
Prevention through Vaccination

8/4/25, 11:18 AM Kennel Cough in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951478&ind=341&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Intranasal Vaccine
Photo courtesy MarVistaVet
Vaccination is only available for Bordetella
bronchiseptica, canine adenovirus type 2,
canine parainfluenza virus, canine
distemper, and canine influenza. Infections
with other members of the kennel cough
complex cannot be prevented. Vaccine
against adenovirus type 2, parainfluenza,
and canine distemper is generally included
in the basic puppy series and subsequent
boosters (the DHPP or distemper-parvo
shot). For Bordetella bronchiseptica,
vaccination can either be given as a
separate injection or as a nasal
immunization. There is some controversy
regarding which method provides a better
immunization or if a combination of both formats is best.
Nasal Vaccine
Intranasal vaccination may be given as early as 3 weeks of age, and immunity generally
lasts 12 to 13 months. The advantage is that local immunity is stimulated right at the site
where the natural infection would try to take hold.
It takes four days to generate a solid immune response after intranasal vaccination, so it is
best if vaccination is given at least four days prior to the exposure. Some dogs will have
some sneezing or nasal discharge in the week following intranasal vaccination; this should
clear up on its own. As a general rule, nasal vaccination provides faster immunity than
injectable vaccination.
Nasal vaccines for Bordetella generally also include a vaccine against parainfluenza virus
and some also include a vaccine against adenovirus type 2.
Oral Vaccine
An oral vaccine is available for Bordetella bronchiseptica (but not adenovirus or
parainfluenza). The idea is that it is easier to give the vaccine with a syringe in the mouth -
just inside the cheek - and there is no concern about sneezing out some of the vaccine.
The oral vaccine can be given to puppies as young as eight weeks of age. The vaccine is
given annually.
Injectable Vaccine
Injectable vaccination is a good choice for aggressive dogs who may bite if their muzzle is
approached. For puppies, injectable vaccination provides good systemic immunity as long
as two doses are given (approximately one month apart) after age 4 months. Boosters are
generally given annually. Some dogs experience a small lump under the skin at the
injection site. This should resolve without treatment.
Vaccination is not useful in a dog already incubating kennel cough.
Bordetella bronchiseptica vaccination may not prevent infection. In some cases,
vaccination minimizes symptoms of illness but does not entirely prevent infection. This is
true whether nasal, oral or injectable vaccine is used.
Dogs that have recovered from Bordetella bronchiseptica are typically immune to
reinfection for six to 12 months.
What if Kennel Cough doesn't Improve?

8/4/25, 11:18 AM Kennel Cough in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951478&ind=341&objTypeID=1007 4/5
As previously noted, this infection is generally self-limiting. It should be at least improved
partially after one week of treatment. If no improvement is seen after that week, a recheck exam (possibly including chest radiographs) would be a good idea. Failure of
kennel cough to resolve suggests an underlying condition. Kennel cough can activate a
previously asymptomatic collapsing trachea, or the condition may have progressed to
pneumonia. Alternatively, there may be another disease afoot entirely, such as noninfectious bronchitis, congestive heart failure, or some other condition that causes
coughing.
If you have questions about a coughing dog, do not hesitate to bring them to your
veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951478&pid=19239
d531be27-8a97-4361-8aee-7771ffe7c33a.1754286481
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:18 AM Kennel Cough in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951478&ind=341&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Leptospira spirochetes
Photo by Janice Haney Carr, courtesy of CDC
Leptospirosis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 22, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
About the Organism
Leptospira organisms are spiral-shaped
bacteria called spirochetes. There are
several species of leptospires, but the ones
that cause disease have been grouped into
one particular species called Leptospira
interrogans sensu lato. From
here, Leptospira interrogans sensu lato has
been sub-classified into smaller related
groups called serovars. Over 250 serovars
have been named and at least 10 are
important for pets. A vaccine for dogs,
however, exists against only four serovars.
Different serovars produce different types of
disease and are in different geographical
areas.
Canicola: This serovar is the most common in Mexico. It primarily produces kidney
disease. Watch out for this serovar in states near the Mexican border.
Pomona: This serovar is associated with livestock and tends to produce severe kidney
and liver disease.
Grippotyphosa: In a survey of over 1,200 healthy dogs in Michigan, 24% tested as
exposed to Leptospira, and the Grippotyphosa serovar was the most common.
Icterohaemorrhagiae: This serovar is mostly associated with exposure to rats and rat
urine in standing water. It tends to attack the liver.
Leptospires live best in warm, slow-moving water, such as after heavy rains or flooding.
After the water clears, they contaminate the soil for many months. Wildlife are common
carriers of infection. A survey in Connecticut found 36% of raccoons had been exposed,
while a survey in Illinois found 48% of raccoons had been. Another survey found that 50%
of rats had been exposed. Classically, infection of dogs and humans stems from the urine
of infected animals getting into environmental water. Leptospirosis is a common human
disease in tropical areas, especially where rice is farmed, and rats infest the
paddies. Health authorities believe that rat populations are involved in the rising incidence
of canine Leptospirosis in urban areas, and Leptospirosis is no longer considered a rural
disease. Leptospires can survive for months in contaminated soil.
This all sounds outdoorsy, but the 2021 Leptospirosis outbreak in Los Angeles started in
boarding facilities where dogs are commonly exposed to the urine of other dogs in play
yards and kennel drainage pathways. Anywhere with potential urine contact is a potential
home for Leptospira organisms.

8/4/25, 11:19 AM Leptospirosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951453&ind=343&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Canine Infection
Dogs become infected by leptospires when irritated or cut skin comes into contact with
infected urine or water contaminated with infected urine. Alternatively, bite wounds,
exposure to reproductive secretions, and even eating infected tissues can transmit this
infection. The organisms quickly spread through the bloodstream, leading first to inflaming
the blood vessels: fever, abnormal bleeding, abnormal bruising, and tissue edema appear
after an approximately seven-day incubation period. By two weeks post-infection, the
leptospires have set up shop in the kidneys, where they continue to generate
inflammation, pain, and potentially total kidney failure and the inability to produce urine.
Some serovars also go to the liver and generate inflammation there, though the liver
disease is generally not as severe as that of the kidney.
A particularly devastating situation occurs if the organism gets into the lungs where the
leptospire toxins produce what is termed “Leptospira Pulmonary Hemorrhage Syndrome."
The lung bleeding that results is associated with a 70% mortality rate and bodes
especially poorly.
If the dog is able to keep the acute illness at bay, a chronic form may emerge. There can
be more chronic kidney insufficiency and/or hepatitis. Furthermore, long-term immune
stimulation can lead to a deep eye inflammation called uveitis that can cause the eyes to
look cloudy or even change color. If the disease is treated in this form, it may not be
possible to reverse the long-term damage that has already set in.
The Different Clinical Pictures of Leptospirosis
As you might gather, Leptospirosis can look different: fever with bruising and bleeding;
fever with different degrees of kidney failure; liver disease and kidney disease together;
chronic hepatitis; and eye inflammation, etc. Another way to look at Leptospirosis is to
look at the time frame of the illness and how quickly or slowly it came on.
Peracute Disease: Peracute disease means very sudden onset. These are usually
younger dogs with an overwhelming exposure. The large amount of leptospire toxin
causes rapid death before the kidney or liver disease even happens.
Acute Disease and Subacute Disease: This is more of the classic form described above—
fever with bruising and bleeding, general muscle pain, and a painful belly from kidney
and/or liver disease. There may be jaundice and inflammation in the eyes that makes
them look cloudy.
Chronic Disease: Recurring fevers, chronic hepatitis, chronic kidney disease, uveitis, poor
appetite, weight loss.
Younger dogs (less than one year of age) tend to get the most severe forms of
Leptospirosis.
87-100% of infected dogs will have some degree of azotemia, which means
kidney values will be elevated on routine blood testing.
Excessive water consumption is frequently seen at home when this happens.
Testing
PCR Testing
PCR testing is used to detect leptospire DNA. A blood sample is best in the first 10 days
after infection, but after that, a urine sample is more likely to be positive. It may be prudent
to submit both blood and urine samples. Past vaccination will not interfere with this test,
although antibiotic exposure certainly will, and results can be back in a matter of days.
PCR testing will not determine which serovar is present.

8/4/25, 11:19 AM Leptospirosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951453&ind=343&objTypeID=1007 2/5
MAT Testing (the Traditional Test)
The Microscopic Agglutination Test, or MAT titer, is still considered the test of choice,
though it has some disadvantages. It measures antibody levels against different L
serovars, with the idea that the one with the highest level is most likely the serovar
causing the disease.
Antibody levels are expressed as titers, which are ratios reflecting how much dilution is
needed before it is too diluted to detect antibodies. For example, a titer of 1:32 means a
serum diluted out 32 times still had detectable antibodies. A titer of 1:32 may sound high
but it is actually low; an MAT titer must be at least 1:800 to be considered positive. If the
serovar under consideration is one that might have been included in a past vaccination,
the titer must be higher (1:3200) to be considered positive.
To really obtain high confidence in the diagnosis of Leptospirosis, a second titer is
submitted two to four weeks later, showing at least a four-fold increase in antibody
production. Treatment with antibiotics should not interfere with the validity of the second
(or "convalescent") titer level.
There are two problems with this testing:
No one wants to wait two to four weeks to confirm the diagnosis, especially with
a disease contagious to humans. PCR testing gets results much faster.
Vaccination interferes with results (remember, the entire goal of vaccination is
to generate an antibody titer). Vaccination history can make interpretation
difficult.
In-House Test Kits and Other General Antibody ELISA Tests
Recently in-house screening tests have become available so that a result can be obtained
in 20 minutes or so. These tests screen for antibodies against Leptospira organisms. They
are either positive or negative. They will not tell you which serovar is involved nor how
high the titer is. They will not distinguish antibodies from vaccination versus those from
true infection. Clearly, a positive test needs to be followed by another test. A negative test,
however, is very helpful (see below).
Other Tests
In the past, cultures and darkfield microscopy were used to detect leptospires. This
technology is now considered old-fashioned.
Which Tests to Use?
A good approach to begin with is a general antibody test combined with urine and blood
PCR testing. If any PCR test detects Leptospira DNA either in blood or urine, the infection
is confirmed. A MAT test will determine which serovar is afoot and the antibody level can
be tracked to be sure the treatment is working.
If the PCR tests are negative (meaning Leptospira DNA was not detected) but a general
antibody test is positive, the MAT test will determine if the antibodies are related to prior
vaccination or active infection.
If PCR tests are negative (Leptospira DNA not found) and no antibodies are found either,
then it should be safe to cross Leptospirosis off the list of possible diagnoses.
Treatment
Fortunately, Leptospira interrogans sensu lato is sensitive to doxycycline, a readily
available antibiotic. Leptospires are cleared from the blood within 24 hours of starting it,
but it takes about a week for them to clear from the urine, so it is important to wear gloves,

8/4/25, 11:19 AM Leptospirosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951453&ind=343&objTypeID=1007 3/5
goggles, etc., and be conscious of contamination during urine cleanup. Infected animals
should be isolated from other animals at least until their antibiotic course is complete and
probably for a couple of weeks after. Check with your veterinarian for instructions.
Intravenous fluids are crucial to support blood flow through the damaged kidneys so that
recovery is possible. Any areas at home that have been contaminated with urine should
be disinfected with an iodine-based product and you should wear gloves while cleaning
any urine. Prognosis is guarded depending on the extent of organ damage; with
appropriate treatment 80-90% survival rates are reported.
This sounds wonderful, but it is important to keep in mind factors that can interfere with
this rosy outcome. While most Leptospirosis-related kidney injury responds to fluid
therapy which can be given by most animal hospitals, more severe cases can require
dialysis, which has limited availability. As mentioned, lung involvement has poor
survivability. Infection with the Pomona serovar is associated with more severe disease.
A good two weeks of doxycycline is generally needed. If this antibiotic is not tolerated,
amoxicillin may also work.
Previously infected dogs may become re-infected. Past infection does not confer future
immunity.
Prevention
Vaccination against Leptospira organisms is only available for some of the serovars or
varieties that we know of. Leptospira interrogans sensu lato is only available for the
serovars called Canicola, Grippotyphosa, Pomona, and Icterohaemorragiae.
Some vaccines cover all four serovars, while others cover only two out of four.
Vaccination against two variants, Canicola and Icterohaemorragiae, has been traditional
for dogs as it is included in the basic distemper shot (DHLPP - the “L” stands for
Leptospirosis). The American Animal Hospital Association vaccine guidelines (as of 2024)
recommend vaccination against Leptospirosis to be a part of the core (always
recommended) vaccines for dogs and to use a vaccine covering all four serovars
whenever possible. Research has shown that all dogs may be at risk of Leptospirosis
regardless of age, breed, location, season, or other factors, but it is more common in
warmer, humid climates with high rainfall.
As with all vaccines, there is a risk for reactions. In the past, the Leptospirosis vaccine
was thought to be associated with a higher chance of immunological vaccine reactions,
but vaccines made from leptospires grown in protein-free media have made vaccination
reactions less likely.
Common vaccine reactions may include fever, swelling at the injection site, and
joint/muscle pain. These symptoms should resolve after a day or so. Small dogs are more
likely to experience reactions. Some vaccine reactions can be serious, so consider talking
to your veterinarian about reactions before vaccination.
Vaccinations should reduce the severity of the disease but will not prevent infected dogs
from becoming carriers.
Other important aspects of prevention include controlling rodents and other wild animals in
the pet's environment and removing standing water so that your pet cannot drink it.
The Infection in Humans
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention monitors Leptospirosis cases in people.
Humans can be infected by direct contact with urine from an infected animal or food, soil,
or water contaminated with urine from an infected animal. The most common species to
transmit Leptospirosis to humans are dogs, rats, raccoons, skunks, opossums, and other
marsupials, cows, pigs, and mice. Recreational activities involving water and exposure to

8/4/25, 11:19 AM Leptospirosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951453&ind=343&objTypeID=1007 4/5
flood waters are also associated with human outbreaks. Other human risk factors include
farm work, animal care work, camping, and sewer work. Remember, leptospires come
from contaminated urine, which, in turn, contaminates environmental water and soil.
The same symptoms occur in humans as would be seen in dogs.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951453&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286555
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:19 AM Leptospirosis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951453&ind=343&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Pediculus humanus var. corporis, from left to right: three
nymphal-staged lice, stage N1, N2, and N3; an adult
male louse; and an adult female louse. Photo courtesy of
CDC
Photo courtesy of CDC
Lice in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: May 15, 2023
Published: June 02, 2008
Lice are an uncommon parasite in dogs and
cats in the U.S. Lice infestations can occur
in animals in any environment, but they're
more common in animals that live in
crowded conditions, in animals that aren't
observed as closely or often, etc. (Frequent,
close examination of the animal's skin and
hair helps prevent one louse from having the
opportunity to turn into an infestation.) Lice
are host-specific. Human lice affect only
humans. Dog lice affect dogs. Cat lice affect
cats. Rarely, a dog or cat louse might end up
on a human, but it doesn't stay there.
Children who have head lice get them from
other humans.
Lice are flat, six-legged, wingless insects that can be seen with the naked eye. (This
makes diagnosis easy.) Lice don't move much or quickly. They spend their entire 21-day
life cycle on a pet. They lay eggs, which are called nits, on the shafts of the hair. Nits are
easy to see. They attach only to the pet's hair and look like white flakes on the hair shaft.
There are two kinds of dog lice. One (Trichodectes canis) chews skin; the other
(Linognathus setosus) sucks blood. The bloodsuckers cause more skin irritation than the
chewers do because they break the skin.
There is one kind of louse (Felicola subrostrata, a chewing louse) that affects cats.
What you will notice with either type of
louse is severe itching and a scruffy dry
coat with bald patches. Lice generally
congregate around the ears, neck,
shoulders, and anus, so those areas will be
most affected.
Because puppies have a small volume of
blood compared to adults, they are more
likely to become anemic as a result of the
blood-sucking lice. In severe cases, a dog
could lose about one-fourth of his blood to
lice within a few months, and end up
anemic or in shock.
Transmission

8/4/25, 11:20 AM Lice in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952773&ind=344&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Both types of dog and cat lice are transmitted by direct contact with an infested dog or cat,
or by contact with nit-contaminated grooming equipment, bedding, etc.
Diagnosis
Your veterinarian can diagnose a louse infestation just by looking at your pet.
Treatment and Prevention
Lice are usually fairly easy to eliminate because they haven't yet built up any resistance to
insecticides.
There are multiple treatment options your veterinarian may employ. The veterinary clinic
employees may bathe your dog with an insecticide shampoo to quickly eliminate the adult
lice, and then use an insecticide spray or powder to continue the job. They may use
fipronil, selamectin, or an isoxazoline (sarolaner, lotilaner, fluralaner, and afoxalaner.)
Whatever treatment is used, the treatment may need to be repeated to kill lice that have
hatched from the eggs. Commonly, the pet will be treated every two weeks for three to
four treatments. (The isoxazoline products may need only 1-2 treatments.) However, in
some cases, treatments may be needed every week for two to four treatments. If your pet
continues to have louse infestations after that point, your veterinarian may switch to
another treatment.
If the coat is matted, the matted areas (or even the entire pet) should be shaved.
Clean grooming equipment after every animal. Places that have larger turnover, such as
rescues, shelters, and boarding kennels, may encounter more animals that carry lice so
sanitation is particularly important.
Dispose of or wash bedding.
Although it's not usually necessary to use a fogger for environmental control of lice, it
might be needed in a severe infestation.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952773&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286600
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:20 AM Lice in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952773&ind=344&objTypeID=1007 2/2
This spirochete is the agent of Lyme disease.
Photo by CDC
Ixodes scapularis is the main carrier
of the Borrelia burgdorferi. Photo by
USDA.
Lyme Disease in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: May 15, 2024
Published: December 06, 2003
See the article summary below.
The infection known today as Lyme
disease (named after the Connecticut
town of Lyme) has been around for at
least a century; public awareness and
confusion did not occur until the late
1980s. Media exposure to this infection
virtually exploded, leaving most of the
general public with some basic knowledge
and concern about this infection as it
pertains to themselves and their dogs.
The canine experience of Lyme disease is
very different from that of a human
infection.
Human Lyme Disease vs. Canine Lyme
Disease
After exposure to the Lyme organism,
90% of humans will ultimately develop
symptoms, but only about 5% of dogs
will experience the disease.
The first lesson to be learned about Lyme
disease infection is that, as mentioned, it
manifests completely differently in man’s
best friend compared with the human
experience. After being bitten by a tick
that has transmitted Borrelia burgdorferi,
90% of humans will develop a rash and
flu-like symptoms. In the next few weeks,
60% of infected people develop joint pain,
with 15% of infected people developing
actual neurologic abnormalities
associated with Lyme disease and 5% of
people developing a heart rhythm
disturbance called “A-V block. At this
same point in the infection timeline, dogs

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 1/7
This is the characteristic skin rash
shown by humans shortly after Borrelia
burgdorferi infection. Dogs only rarely
exhibit a similar rash with Lyme
disease. Photo by CDC.
The larva (bottom right), nymph (bottom
left), and adult female (top). Photo by
CDC
have yet to develop any symptoms at all,
and 95% of infected dogs never will. In
humans, Lyme disease presents with the
potential for serious long-term illness,
while this is a possibility for only a small
number of dogs.
When canine illness does occur, it does
not begin to manifest for weeks to months
after infection, at which point arthritis
signs are noticed.
Sometimes, there is a fever. Most canine
Lyme patients respond rapidly to a simple
course of proper antibiotics, but some
unlucky dogs develop associated kidney
disease, so some related screening tests
will be recommended for dogs testing
positive for Lyme disease infection.
Heart and neurologic issues are
exceedingly rare.
The Borrelia burgdorferi organism is well
suited to live in the canine body without
causing trouble. Most exposed dogs
harbor the organism uneventfully. Still, it
is important not to discount Lyme disease
in dogs completely or an easily eliminated
cause of chronic joint disease may be
overlooked, especially in dogs of the
Northeast U.S.
The infected dog’s most serious long-term
potential is glomerular disease. This is a
type of kidney damage that occurs when
the immune system is stimulated over a
long time by a latent infectious organism
or other immune stimuli in hiding. This is a
more insidious problem for which specific
testing is needed (see below).
The Tick and Its Control
An organism that serves to transport and deliver an infectious organism from one host to
another is called a vector. The vector of Lyme disease in the Northeastern United States is
the deer tick, Ixodes scapularis. The female tick lays a clump of approximately 2,000 eggs
in the spring. A small six-legged larva hatches and attaches to a host as soon as it is able.
Since the larva is small, it typically can only reach a small host, usually a white-footed
mouse.
If the mouse carries the Lyme disease spirochete, the baby tick will become infected when
it drinks the mouse's blood. The tick won't get sick, but it will carry the Lyme organism with
it throughout its life.
When the larva is full of blood, it will drop off the host and lie dormant until the following
spring, about a year later. At this point, the larva molts and becomes a nymph. The nymph
is a bit larger and may select another mouse as a host or may approach a larger game
such as a dog or human. The nymph feeds for three to five days and when it is full it drops
off and remains dormant until late summer. It then molts into an adult tick. When the

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 2/7
nymph is feeding, it may infect its host with the Lyme spirochete. If the nymph was not
already infected from its larval stage, it may become infected now during its spring
feeding.
The adult tick seeks a larger host, hence its name the deer tick; however, with man
encroaching upon the range of the deer, there are often plenty of dogs or humans for the
tick to attack. The adult ticks mate on their new host, feed, and transmit the Lyme
spirochete if they are carrying it. The male tick remains attached through the winter but
the female, once engorged with the host’s blood, drops off, hides under leaves and other
debris through the winter, and in spring lays her eggs for the two-year cycle to begin
again.
This process of transmitting Borrelia burgdorferi from the tick to the new
mammal host requires a minimum of 48 hours, which means that if the tick is
removed within 48 hours of attachment, the spirochete cannot be transmitted and
the host will not get the disease.
Tick control on the host is an effective means of preventing infection. There are numerous
effective tick control products available in assorted formats including chewable treats,
collars, and topical spot-on treatments. All of these products either kill the tick or cause it
to drop off before the 48-hour deadline.
On the west coast of the United States, there is far less Lyme disease than in the east,
although the northern coast of California is considered to have moderate risk. This is
because the Lyme vector in these areas is primarily Ixodes pacificus, a tick whose
nymphal and larval stages strongly prefer to feed on reptiles rather than mammals. Reptile
blood has natural anti-Borrelia factors that kill the Lyme spirochete and prevent further
transmission.
There are several subspecies of Borrelia burgdorferi in different parts of the world, so
Lyme disease is not unique to the United States.
Borrelia burgdorferi: The Spirochete and Its Detection
The spirochete that causes Lyme disease cannot live outside the body of a host. It must
live within either a mammal or a tick.
In the mammal’s body, the spirochete is especially adept at binding to connective tissue. If
you are doing additional reading on this organism, you will encounter references to the
spirochete’s surface proteins called Osp (Osp stands for outer surface protein). Different
Osps are expressed depending on whether the spirochete is attached to the tick midgut
(OspA, OspB, and OspD) or the mammal’s connective tissue (OspC). By modifying its
Osps, the spirochete can change its presentation to the mammalian host’s immune
system thus escaping immune destruction. In addition to changing Osps, the spirochete
can change its presentation to the mammalian host’s immune system, thus escaping
immune destruction. In addition to changing Osps, the spirochete can change its shape
into at least three different forms and can hide within cellular folds. The Lyme spirochete is
a master of disguise and camouflage.
This camouflage presents an enormous diagnostic challenge: if the actual host's
immune system can't even find the organism, how are we supposed to detect it?
Antibody Levels
A dog with symptoms of Lyme disease ideally should have a test to confirm or rule out
Lyme disease. Since it is almost impossible to culture the Lyme spirochete, efforts have
centered on the detection of antibodies against the Osps. The problems encountered with
this method are:

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 3/7
In a Lyme endemic area, as many as 90% of the dogs will have antibodies
against the Lyme spirochete. Most exposed dogs never get sick but almost all
of them will develop antibodies and these antibodies persist for years.
How do we tell the dogs that have an active infection from those that have been
exposed and are not sick from their exposure? (In other words, is our sick dog
sick because of his Lyme disease infection, or is the Lyme infection incidental
and he's sick from something else?).
Vaccine has been available for Lyme disease for decades. How do we
distinguish antibodies generated by the vaccine from those generated by
natural infection?
How do we distinguish antibodies generated by similar organisms (Leptospira,
for example, or harmless other Borrelia species)?
The solution to some of these problems has come about in the form of the “C6 Antibody
test.” This is an immunological test for antibodies against the “C6 peptide,” a very unique
section of the Borrelia burgdorgeri surface antigens. It is only displayed by the organism
after transmission into the mammal host's body.
As the spirochete changes its configuration to escape the host's immune system, the C6
peptide remains constant and always detectable. The vaccine does not contain the C6
peptide so vaccinated dogs will not test positive. Dogs with other infections will not
erroneously test positive. Furthermore, this test is simple enough to be available as an inhouse test kit that can be run in most veterinary hospitals, with results in approximately 10
minutes.
This still does not address distinguishing active infection from exposure. Dogs will test C6
positive within 3-5 weeks of infection. They stay positive for over a year. Putting together a
clinical diagnosis based on the test results and symptoms of the pet remains in the realm
of the veterinarian in charge.
Testing Apparently Healthy Dogs
The American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine Consensus Statement on Lyme
disease recommends testing any dog living in or recently visiting a Lyme endemic area for
C6 antibodies. In areas where Lyme disease is common, this is typically done as part of
the annual wellness visit along with heartworm testing. The idea is to identify infected
dogs and then screen them for urinary protein loss to catch the diagnosis of Lyme
Nephritis early. Since dogs do not generally get sick from their Lyme Borrelia infection,
most experts do not recommend treating dogs for Lyme disease simply because they are
positive for C6 antibodies but owners should be aware of the potential for Lyme disease
symptoms in the future.
Treatment and Its Goals
Which of these dogs get sick and which do not? Does the dog with joint pain, fever, and a
positive C6 test need medication? This is where the news is particularly good.
Treatment of Lyme disease utilizes a two to four-week course of doxycycline or its cousin
minocycline. Oral amoxicillin or injectable cefovecin (Convenia®) can also be used as
effective alternatives.
If Lyme disease is a consideration, many veterinarians simply prescribe the medication.
An obvious improvement is seen within 48 hours. Furthermore, most tick-borne infections
capable of causing joint pain, fever, and signs similar to Lyme disease generally all
respond to doxycycline so a simple course of medication covers several types of infection.
Complete elimination of the Lyme spirochete is not a reasonable expectation with
treatment; the organism is simply too good at hiding. The goal instead is to bring the
patient into what is called a premunitive state, or when the immune system is in a

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 4/7
protective mode. This is the state that 90% of infected dogs achieve when they get
infected but never get ill: the organism is in their bodies latently but is not causing active
infection or disease.
Glomerular Disease (Lyme Nephritis)
Discussing a particularly serious complication of Borrelia burgdorferi infection is important:
Lyme nephritis. While this occurs in a small portion of infected dogs, the consequences to
the kidneys are frequently severe. While, as noted, a good 90 percent of dogs infected
with Borrelia burgdorferi never get sick, some infected dogs are harmed by the long-time
presence of an infectious organism in their bodies. The immune system is constantly
active in its attempt to remove the invading spirochete, and over the years these
complexes of antibodies may deposit in the kidney and cause damage that can be
severe. This group of dogs will likely require medication for their kidney disease:
antibiotics, treatments to reduce protein loss in urine, and potentially immune suppressive
therapy. It has been recommended that dogs with positive Borrelia burgdorferi antibody
levels be regularly screened for significant protein loss in their urine with a test called a
“urine protein to creatinine ratio” so as not to miss these patients while their disease is still
treatable.
Vaccination: Lyme Disease Vaccination
The object of vaccination is to prevent infection in dogs vaccinated before any exposure to
Lyme spirochetes. A series of two vaccines is given with one dose 2-4 weeks apart
followed by annual boosters. Some experts recommend a 6-month booster before going
to the annual booster schedule. Dogs living or visiting Lyme areas will definitely need tick
prevention and vaccination should be considered for additional protection.
Virtually all the vaccines act by blocking OspA. Basically the tick drinks in the vaccinated
host's blood full of anti-OspA antibodies. The Borrelia organism needs OspA to effectively
move into the tick's mouth parts for transmission to the host but with the tick's belly full of
OspA antibodies, OspA is blocked and the spirochete is quarantined inside the tick.
Several types of vaccines have been marketed, and all of them are effective:
Killed Whole Bacterin
The killed whole spirochete vaccine uses intact dead spirochetes injected into the host. By
using the entire spirochete, the host is exposed to parts of the organism that are not
useful in immunization and has more potential to lead to vaccine reactions.
Recombinant OspA Vaccine
The next type of vaccine is felt to be superior in preventing reactions and that is the
recombinant vaccine against OspA. This vaccine generates antibodies specifically against
OspA, the surface protein the spirochete uses to attach to its tick host. When the tick bites
and sucks blood full of Anti-OspA antibodies, the spirochete’s migration sequence is
blocked and the spirochete is prevented from even exiting the tick. The vaccine utilizes
DNA for OspA cloned into a harmless virus so that the entire Lyme spirochete is not used;
only the OspA DNA is used.
OspA and OspC Vaccine
The third type of vaccine targets both OspA, as above, and OspC. OspC is the surface
protein the Borrelia organism expresses inside the dog. The idea is that the OspC
antibodies target Borrelia organisms that make it inside the dog's body, theoretically
providing enhanced protection.
Recombinant OspA plus Chimerized OspC Vaccine
This vaccine has all the advantages of the OspA attack and the advantages of
recombinant technology. Taking things a step further is the Chimerized OspC portion. The
idea here is that Borrelia burgdorferi expresses OspC in the dog's body, and generating
antibodies against OspC enables the immune system to find the organism wherever it is

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 5/7
hiding. The problem is that OspC is not one protein; there are many forms of OspC.
Chimerizing OspC means taking seven versions of OspC and binding pieces together into
one protein clump.
In this way, the immune system can be directed against multiple versions of OspC rather
than only one.
Should Healthy Dogs That Test Positive Still Get Vaccinated?
Prevention of Lyme disease in the dog is based on the following principles: Vaccination,
Education, and Tick control. Hopefully, we have covered all of this in this article.
This is a controversial subject and every veterinarian will have a perspective. Here are the
pros and cons:
Argument For Vaccination
Vaccines work by preventing new Borrelia organisms from entering the host.
Whether or not a given dog develops actual symptoms of Lyme disease
(nephritis in particular) will depend on how many organisms the dog has to deal
with. Vaccination will minimize the number of organisms in the dog's body by
preventing the entry of new organisms.
Argument Against Vaccination
The idea that more organisms = more chance of disease is still theoretical.
Unnecessary vaccine, especially if a "whole cell" vaccine is used, increases the
chance of vaccination reaction.
Some experts feel a 2-week course of antibiotics should be given to a positive
dog before vaccination to reduce the load of organisms and reduce the chance
of vaccination reaction. This practice is not likely to have side effects but any
medication has that potential.
Dogs that are Lyme positive and sick (including having urinary protein loss) should not be
vaccinated for Lyme disease.
When it comes to prevention, there is nothing controversial about tick control. It
is crucial in Lyme-endemic areas to use tick-controlling products.
Lyme disease is a regional problem. For more guidance regarding this infection in your
area, or areas where you will be traveling, see your veterinarian.
Additional Links
CDC
AVMA
In Summary:
Lyme disease in dogs is quite different than in humans.
95% of infected dogs never will show symptoms.
Weeks to months after infection, there may be signs of joint pain or a fever.
Most serious long-term potential complication affects the kidneys - called
glomerular disease or Lyme Nephritis.
If the tick is removed before it has been attached for 48 hours, your dog
cannot get Lyme disease. It takes 48 hours for the bacteria to transmit.
It is recommended that any dog living in or recently visiting a high-risk area
have a C6 antibody test to identify those dogs to monitor for future Lyme

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 6/7
disease signs. That test is typically done during a wellness appointment,
just like heartworm testing.
Treatment usually consists of the antibiotic doxycycline or minocycline.
Prevention includes vaccines and dedicated tick control.
Many effective vaccines are available, each with its advantages and
disadvantages. Vaccination prevents more of the organism from entering
but the idea that more organism equals more chance of disease is still
being researched. Your veterinarian will have advice as to which is best for
your dog. Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952009&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286637
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:21 AM Lyme Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952009&ind=345&objTypeID=1007 7/7
The dark footprint-like structures seen here are the yeast organisms
Malassezia pachydermatis. Photo courtesy CDC
Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast Infection of Dog's Skin)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 31, 2024
Published: September 10, 2001
Yeasts are spore-like forms of fungi; malassezia dermatitis is an inflammatory skin
disease that results from the overgrowth of the natural malassezia yeast population on the
skin.
Why Suspect Yeast?
Yeast infections are itchy, crusty,
and smelly. Often a dog starts
out with a rash or simple itching,
but the skin thickens to an
elephant skin appearance. The
itch is extreme, and the odor can
be especially troublesome. Parts
of the body or the entire body
can be affected. Mostly, dogs are
affected, but cats can get yeast
infections as well.
Where Would a Dog Get a Yeast
Infection?
Yeast happily lives on most
normal skin and in ears, claw
folds, and anal glands.
To get a yeast infection,
conditions on the skin surface have to change to favor the proliferation of the yeasts. The
yeasts in small normal numbers are harmless, but when the yeasts are in large numbers,
disease results. It is also possible to actually become allergic to the proteins in the yeast
cell wall (see below) so that very few yeast organisms are needed to incite very big
inflammation.
So, what conditions lead to yeast proliferation? An increase in skin oils (which often
occurs in an allergic flare-up) would be the most common situation. Sometimes there is an
immune deficiency that allows the yeast proliferation. Some animals are battling
seborrhea (excessive oil production of the skin) and thus are naturally predisposed to
yeast proliferation. Some animals are actually allergic to the yeasts themselves. The most
important thing to realize is that while a yeast infection is not contagious, it tends to recur
unless the underlying allergy, seborrhea, or other problem is controlled.
The following breeds are predisposed genetically to yeast infections: the West Highland
White Terrier, Basset hound, Cocker spaniel, Silky terrier, Australian terrier, Maltese,
Chihuahua, Poodle, Shetland sheepdog, Lhasa apso, and the Dachshund.
How is Yeast Infection/Overgrowth Confirmed?

8/4/25, 11:22 AM Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast Infection of Dog's Skin) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951356&ind=346&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Note the elephant skin appearance that is especially
common with Malassezia dermatitis. The more scientific
term for this finding is lichenification. Photo courtesy Carol
Foil DVM
This dog's skin also shows lichenification along with redness
from active inflammation. Photo courtesy MarVistaVet
There are several testing methods to
confirm the overgrowth of yeasts:
Impression smear (pressing a
microscope slide on the skin to
collect yeast organisms)
Scotch tape sampling (pressing a
piece of clear tape to the skin to
collect yeast organisms)
Skin scraping with a blade
(scraping the skin with a blade to
collect yeast organisms)
Cotton swab (rubbing a moistened
cotton swab on the skin to collect
yeast organisms)
Skin biopsy (removing a small
plug of skin with a biopsy punch
with a local anesthetic. This is the
most invasive choice but provides
substantially more diagnostic information.)
Very few yeasts need to be seen under the microscope to confirm yeast infection.
How to Get Rid of it?
Treatment can be topical, oral, or both.
Topical treatment is best used for localized
spots of infection while oral medication
would be better applied to larger infected
areas. If the yeast infection is recurrent or
if you wish to supplement oral medication,
topical and oral treatment can be
combined.
Oral therapy
Ketoconazole and its derivatives rule when
it comes to oral therapy. Typically, a
several-week treatment is needed, and there are numerous protocols involving different
dosing schedules. Higher doses tend to be needed if recurrence is a problem. The
extreme itch usually improves or resolves within one week. For animals that do not
tolerate the azole class of medications, terbinafine is a good alternative choice. If oral
medications are not effective, this suggests a biofilm has formed, and topical treatment
must be added.
Shampoos
Recently a consensus statement was published by veterinary dermatologists regarding
Malassezia dermatitis. When it came to shampoos, those favored contained 2%
miconazole and 2% chlorhexidine. Shampoos were applied twice weekly with a 10-minute
contact time before rinsing. This type of therapy was helpful in improving the effectiveness
of the oral medication and was also a good choice for long-term maintenance therapy
once the infection was controlled. There are many shampoo products available with these
active ingredients, with vinegar bases, selenium, and/or topical ketoconazole. Your
veterinarian may have a preferred product or regimen.
Spot Treatments
If only a small area is involved, it is probably not necessary to bathe the entire animal.
Acetic acid wipes can be used to cleanse the affected area. Mixtures of vinegar and water

8/4/25, 11:22 AM Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast Infection of Dog's Skin) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951356&ind=346&objTypeID=1007 2/3
can be used, but the pet will develop a distinct vinegar odor.
Treating the Underlying Cause
It is important to realize that yeast overgrowth occurs in response to a primary problem,
be it allergy, seborrhea, or something else. If the underlying problem is not controlled,
yeast dermatitis is likely to recur periodically. It is common for allergic dogs to require
some kind of periodic if not ongoing, anti-yeast therapy.
See more information about airborne allergies.
See more information about food allergies.
See more information about flea control.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951356&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286757
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:22 AM Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast Infection of Dog's Skin) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951356&ind=346&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Severe chronic atopic otitis.
This dog has had a lateral ear canal resection, but the
symptoms of severe AD have compromised management
of otitis externa. Courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil.
Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats
Shalini Radhakrishnan, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Published: August 04, 2020
What is Malassezia otitis?
Malassezia spp. are a common secondary
cause of otitis or inflammation of the ear
canal. It is a yeast that normally lives in the
ears of cats and dogs but overgrows when
the environment of the ear canal changes.
This change is a result of increased fatty
secretions and moisture, making it easier for
the Malassezia to multiply. Some primary, or
underlying, causes of ear infection include
allergies (atopic dermatitis or food
hypersensitivity) and narrowed ear canals.
Studies have shown that bacteria can be
found in combination with a Malassezia
otitis.
Who gets it?
Malassezia ear infection is common in dogs, but cats can also be infected. Dogs with
narrow ear canals or increased ear secretions create the perfect environment for yeast
overgrowth. There is no specific age group or sex this infection targets.
What are the signs?
Many of these signs are similar to those from other types of ear infection. Therefore, the
veterinarian will have to complete diagnostic tests to prove there is yeast overgrowth.
Signs of ear infections include:
 Increased ear wax and discharge
 Odor
 Head shaking
 Swollen or ulcerated ear flap
 Hair loss on ears
 Increased pigmentation of ears
Aural hematomas (collection of blood under the skin of the ear)
 Itchy
 Painful
 Loss of hearing
How is Malassezia otitis diagnosed?
A veterinarian’s exam of the ear canal may show ulcerations, redness, swelling, dark
brown waxy discharge, a musty odor, or masses. If your pet is in pain, sedation or general
anesthesia may be needed for your pet’s veterinarian to complete a full exam of the ear.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9755599&ind=347&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Cytology is an important part of diagnosing Malassezia otitis. The veterinarian will swab
some debris out of the ear canal to view with a microscope. If your pet has a Malassezia
ear infection, your veterinarian may see a greater than normal amount of yeast.
How is Malassezia otitis treated and prevented?
Cleaning the ear at home to remove excess debris that prevents medication
from working. (With some medications cleaning will not be advised or may be
unnecessary, so follow your veterinarian's instructions specific to your pet.)
Topical antifungals to treat the yeast infection.
Therapy length varies and your veterinarian determines if treatment may be stopped
during the re-check appointment.
Without addressing the underlying, or primary, cause of the Malassezia otitis, the ear
infection will return when the medication is stopped. Repeated ear infections can lead to a
deeper ear infection and long-term use of some medications can cause side-effects. Your
veterinarian can work with you to find and treat the primary cause of Malassezia otitis.
Determining why your pet develops ear infections will help prevent future ear infections
and reduce the need for ear medications.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9755599&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286783
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM Malassezia Otitis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9755599&ind=347&objTypeID=1007 2/2
MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: June 02, 2020
MRSA
MRSA is the abbreviation for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Staphylococcus
aureus is a type of bacteria primarily found in people and may also be called Staph
aureus, S. aureus, or a staph infection. Methicillin is a type of antibiotic that was created in
the late 1950s to combat Staphylococcus aureus bacteria that had become resistant to
penicillin. For bacteria that are resistant to an antibiotic, that means the antibiotic, which
should normally be able to kill the bacteria, is not strong enough to kill it. In other words,
those antibiotics no longer work. In the early 1960s it was discovered that some S. aureus
bacteria had also become resistant to methicillin. Thus, MRSA became the new name for
this type of bacteria.
Even though methicillin is no longer used today, the name remains because MRSA, and
its veterinary counterpart MRSP, remain resistant to many types of antibiotics (referred to
as a multi-drug resistant bacteria), making it extremely hard to kill. Even more concerning
is that MRSA is quick to adapt, or change, to its current environment, so it is able to
become resistant to new drugs and treatments and avoid being removed by the immune
system. This limits the options of what can be used to treat infections caused by MRSA.
MRSP
MRSP stands for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudointermedius (S.
pseudointermedius). Unlike S. aureus, S. pseudointermedius is more commonly found on
dogs, and less commonly cats, than people. It too is resistant to numerous drugs and
adapts quickly to the immune system, so it is a big concern for veterinary patients.
Where Do MRSA and MRSP Come from?
MRSA can be contracted by people from their environment, such as the community where
they live and work, or in a hospital or nursing home setting. Any person can get MRSA.
Risk for infection is increased with crowded areas, skin to skin contact with an infected
person, and sharing equipment or supplies (e.g. medical equipment, towels, shaving
razors). Open wounds, such as a scratch, are a common site for infection. One study
found that 5% of people hospitalized in the United States carry MRSA in their nose or on
their skin, even if they do not show symptoms. MRSP can be contracted from the
environment as well, but may be more likely to come from a veterinary hospital setting.
What Does MRSA or MRSP Look Like?
Common MRSA infections include pneumonia, skin, bloodstream (sepsis), or surgical site
infections. Common sites of infection for MRSP are the skin, open wounds, and surgical
sites. MRSP can also occur from skin infections that the pet already had. Pets with skin
infections caused by a different bacteria or microbe can actually develop MRSP before the
first infection has healed.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9718905&ind=348&objTypeID=1007 1/2
It is important to understand that you cannot tell by looking at infected skin or wounds
what type of infection it is. See a veterinarian for your pet, or a physician for you or your
family members, if you suspect an infection so it can be checked out thoroughly and
handled appropriately.
Can I Get MRSA or MRSP from My Pet?
Technically, all people and pets can develop MRSA and MRSP infections. However,
MRSA does not thrive well on animals because it has become so well adapted to living on
people. Dogs and cats can develop MRSA infections, but if they are healthy, the bacteria
won’t be able to grow and multiply as well as it would on a human being. Many healthy
pets’ immune systems can beat the infection within a few weeks. While MRSA can
potentially be transmitted between pets and people, it is much more likely for people to
transmit MRSA to pets rather than pets infecting people. Of further importance, research
has shown that there is no need to test pets for MRSA if a human becomes infected.
MRSP infections in people are uncommon, and the risk of transmission from an infected
pet to humans is low. This is because, like MRSA, MRSP has adapted itself to live more
easily on pets. In fact, it is extremely difficult to get rid of once it has started growing and
multiplying. Dogs could potentially have MRSP for months to years, and in some cases,
for life. Although transmission of MRSP from pets to humans is not common, transmission
from pets to other pets is a concern, so care should be taken to prevent bacterial spread if
possible.
How Do I Prevent MRSA/MRSP?
Good hygiene, such as frequent hand washing and regularly bathing, are great ways to
help prevent spread of infection. Wash bedding and towels regularly. Cover any open or
healing wounds with a bandage, making sure to change it regularly. Finally, if you or your
pet are prescribed antibiotics, make sure to take or give them exactly as prescribed and
finish all of them.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9718905&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286807
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA vs. MRSP in Dogs & Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9718905&ind=348&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Photo by CDC/NIAID. MRSA bacteria (purple) is being
destroyed by a blue-colored human white blood cell
called a neutrophil.
MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs
and Cats
J. Scott Weese, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: May 12, 2017
Published: November 04, 2009
Staphylococcus aureus, often called Staph
aureus or S. aureus, is a bacterium that is
normally carried in the nose of about 30% of
the general human population. While dogs
and cats do not commonly carry it, they can.
Typically it causes no problems, but it is an
opportunistic pathogen – if a pet or person
gets injured or sick, S. aureus can take
advantage of the body’s weakened defenses
and cause infection. It can infect almost any
tissue, but skin and soft tissue infections are
most common.
Strains of S. aureus can be either methicillinresistant (MRSA) or methicillin-susceptible
(MSSA). But MRSA strains are not just
resistant to methicillin, they’re resistant to all
the antibiotics in the same drug family as methicillin (the beta lactams), including many
common drugs such as penicillins and cephalosporins. Some strains of MRSA are also
resistant to other families of antibiotics, which can make them extremely difficult to treat.
People and animals can carry MRSA without any signs of infection at all: This is known as
colonization, which may be short-term or long-term.
In dogs and cats, the most common conditions associated with MRSA tend to be skin
infections, post-operative incisional infections and wound infections. The bacteria have
also been isolated from the urinary tract, auditory canal, skin, eye and joints.
How Common is MRSA?
The frequency with which it is found in pets varies widely between studies. Cases of
MRSA colonization and infection were first described in dogs and cats in the 1990s,
including some reports in which the people who lived with the pet were carrying the same
strain. As in people, the percentage of healthy pets that carry MRSA is low (less than 4%).
Risk factors for MRSA in pets are largely unknown. Some are likely similar to those in
humans, such as previous surgery, hospitalization, and antibiotic use. Pets used in
hospital visitation programs may also be at increased risk.
How is MRSA Transmitted?
It is suspected that MRSA found in pets usually originates from humans, but pets can
transmit it to people. Transmission can lead to colonization alone, infection, or both.
However, once colonized or infected, dogs and cats can pass the bacterium on to other

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952889&ind=349&objTypeID=1007 1/4
animals and people.
Pets can carry MRSA in their noses and around the anus. Direct contact with these areas
or tissues infected with MRSA (e.g., an infected incision) is most likely to result in
transmission from pets to people.
How is MRSA Diagnosed?
MRSA is usually diagnosed based on a bacterial culture, which can take one to three days
to complete. Molecular tests are now being used that can detect MRSA in people more
rapidly (hours versus days), but these tests are not used in animals. Pets tend to have the
same strains that are common in people in the same geographic region.
The ideal body site to culture in colonized animals is unknown, but swabs are usually
taken of the nose and the area around the anus.
How is MRSA Treated?
Colonization
Most if not all pets eliminate MRSA colonization on their own within a few weeks as long
as they are not re-exposed to the bacterium – decolonization therapy with antibiotics is not
needed or recommended, but household infection control practices (see below) are
important.
Infection
All MRSA strains are resistant to beta-lactam antibiotics, but because different strains may
be resistant to other antibiotics as well, the bacteria must be tested in order to choose the
best antibiotic. Automatically choosing the most powerful antibiotic to treat the infection
when a more common drug will do can be dangerous - and expensive - because the
MRSA, or other bacteria in the body, may become resistant to it, and then there may be
no drug that can effectively treat it. Local treatment of skin and soft tissue MRSA
infections (e.g. lancing and flushing an abscess) is often effective as well and should not
be overlooked, even if the animal is also treated with antibiotics.
Infection Control for MRSA in Pets
Even though MRSA colonization is uncommon in healthy pets, if they have been exposed
to a hospital environment (such as animals in hospital visitation programs) or to a person
who was recently hospitalized, they may be more likely to be carrying MRSA. Hand
hygiene is the simplest and most practical way to prevent transmission of MRSA between
humans and animals. Use soap and water or an alcohol-based hand sanitizer on your
hands.
What Should I do if my Pet is Infected with MRSA?
Don’t panic! The majority of MRSA infections can be treated effectively if they are
diagnosed and appropriate treatment is started in a timely manner. No matter at what
point the treatment begins, follow the treatment recommendations of your veterinarian
carefully. It is especially important to completely finish any antibiotic prescriptions, as
directed, even if your pet seems to be better earlier.
Avoid contact with the infected area of your pet. If possible the area should be kept
covered or bandaged. Wear gloves if you need to change the bandage and place all used
bandage materials directly in the garbage. Wash your hands well after handling your pet,
and especially after changing any bandages.
Infected pets are often colonized as well, so also follow the recommendations for
colonized pets below.
What Should I do if my pet is Colonized with MRSA?

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952889&ind=349&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Animals that are positive for MRSA can stay at home if there are no high-risk
people (e.g. HIV/AIDS, cancer or transplant patients) in the household. Avoid
touching the pet’s nose or anal area because these are the most likely areas to
harbor MRSA. Don’t allow the pet to lick a person’s face or any area of broken
or damaged skin.
MRSA-positive dogs should be walked in low-traffic areas where they are not
likely to encounter other animals or people to which they may transmit MRSA
through direct contact. MRSA can be found in the stool of colonized animals, so
stool should be collected as promptly as possible and disposed of directly into
the garbage. Wash your hands after any contact with stool or handling plastic
bags containing stool since minor breaks in the bags are possible and
contamination of the hands could occur.
MRSA-positive cats should be kept indoors. Cat litter boxes should be scooped
out daily. Wash your hands after cleaning the litter box.
Although the importance of the environment in transmission of MRSA is
unclear, MRSA can survive in the environment for some time. The toys and
bedding of an MRSA-positive pet should regularly be changed/cleaned (daily if
possible) to reduce the exposure of both the animal and people to MRSA.
MRSA can survive in the environment for a limited period of time. However, the
bacteria are susceptible to most commonly used disinfectants if the
surface/equipment is cleaned properly before the disinfectant is applied.
Hand hygiene remains the most important means of preventing transmission.
Keep the pet off beds, and especially off of pillows used by people.
Therapy Animals
Animals that regularly visit healthcare facilities are more likely to be exposed to MRSA,
and therefore are more likely to carry it. There are guidelines available to help reduce the
risk of pets acquiring infectious diseases in hospitals. These include:
Never let your pet lick a patient’s face, hands or any area of broken skin.
Do not let patients feed your pet any treats.
If your pet needs to be placed on a bed or patient’s lap, place your animal on a
clean towel or sheet, never directly on the patient’s hospital gown or bed
sheets.
Testing or treating normal animals for MRSA is not necessary, but MRSA
should be considered in these animals if they develop infections, particularly of
the skin and soft tissues.
To help prevent the spread of MRSA, wash your therapy pet’s vest after a
hospital visit.
If I have MRSA, how do I Protect my Pet?
Wash your hands thoroughly before and after handling your pet to help prevent transfer of
MRSA to your pet, and transfer of MRSA from your pet if he becomes colonized.
Do not kiss your pet, and do not let your animal to lick your face or any broken skin.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952889&ind=349&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Testing or treating normal pets for MRSA is not necessary, even if a person in the house is
infected or colonized with MRSA. However, if one or more individuals in a household
repeatedly tests positive for MRSA, then screening of pets for MRSA may be considered
as part of a whole-household intervention, which includes screening and decolonization of
all people.
Is My Pet the Source of my MRSA Infection?
Pets can be carriers of MRSA, especially in households where people are repeatedly
found to have MRSA infections, but this does not mean they are the source. Pets are
often innocent bystanders who acquire MRSA from their owners. If all the people in the
household are being tested for MRSA, then testing of pets should also be coordinated by
your veterinarian in consultation with the attending physician.
If household infection control measures fail to control transmission of MRSA between
people, and there is evidence that a pet may be a source of MRSA, you can consider
temporarily removing the pet from the household but that is rarely necessary. This should
allow the pet to naturally eliminate MRSA colonization while the human members of the
household undergo decolonization. Permanent removal of pets is not indicated.
It is impossible to completely prevent pets or people from being exposed to MRSA
because so many people and animals carry MRSA without any signs. However, critical
prevention tools are proper use of antibiotics according to the prescription and only using
antibiotics when really needed.
Prognosis
The prognosis for MRSA infections depends more on the type of infection than the fact
that MRSA is present. The majority of MRSA infections are treatable and there is currently
no indication that MRSA infections carry a poorer prognosis than methicillin-susceptible S.
aureus infection, provided proper treatment is started. The key is prompt diagnosis so that
appropriate treatment can be initiated.
Links
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2008. Community-associated methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (CA-MRSA). Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/ar_mrsa_ca.html. Accessed Aug 2008.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2007. Healthcare-associated methicillinresistant Staphylococcus aureus (HA-MRSA). Available at:
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/ar_mrsa.html. Accessed Aug 2008.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952889&pid=19239
80c05df8-b940-4349-bdf6-4a47456e63a8.1754286831
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:23 AM MRSA: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952889&ind=349&objTypeID=1007 4/4
MRSP Dogs and Spaying
J. Scott Weese, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: September 02, 2013
Published: October 07, 2011
This is an increasingly common question, as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius (MRSP – essentially the canine version of the high-profile human
"superbug" MRSA) has expanded greatly in the canine population. As more dogs get
MRSP infections and even more become inapparent carriers of this bug, more dogs that
are carriers will need surgery (both elective and non-elective). Since MRSP is now a
leading cause of surgical site infections in dogs, there’s concern about what to do with
these carriers, particularly when it comes to elective surgeries like spays and neuters.
My answer to the question is… maybe.
If the dog has an active MRSP infection (e.g. skin infection), I’d say "hold off for a while" if
possible. I don’t like elective surgeries being done on animals with active infections (this
applies to almost any kind of infection, not just MRSP). If an animal has an active MRSP
infection, it might increase the risk of the surgical site becoming infected because of the
greater overall burden of MRSP on the skin and elsewhere.
If the dog doesn’t have an active infection (e.g. is a healthy carrier after having gotten over
a previous MRSP infection), I’d say "go ahead."
Here’s why:
Spay-associated infections are quite rare.
We don’t use antibiotics prophylactically (i.e preventatively) for spays (or at
least, they shouldn’t be used for this kind of low-risk procedure – unfortunately
some people still use them inappropriately).
MRSP is no more likely to cause a spay infection than methicillin-susceptible S.
pseudintermedius. It’s just harder to kill when an infection occurs.
Methicillin-susceptible S. pseudintermedius can be found on almost all dogs.
So, if infections are rare, despite the fact that S. pseudintermedius is present on pretty
much all dogs and that we don’t use drugs to kill S. pseudintermedius during (or after)
spays, there should be no added risk of infection by the antibiotic-resistant version of this
bug.
Every dog is carrying lots of different bacteria that can cause an infection at any time.
That’s why we use a variety of surgical antisepsis practices (e.g. clipping, scrubbing,
sterile instruments, proper operating room) to help prevent a critical number of bacteria
from getting into the sterile surgical site where they can start to cause problems.
This strategy doesn’t necessarily apply to surgeries where antibiotics are used
prophylactically (preventive) and where staph are the main causes of infection, especially
in situations like orthopedic procedures where MRSP infections are common and can be

8/4/25, 11:24 AM MRSP Dogs and Spaying - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=5138474&ind=350&objTypeID=1007 1/2
very hard to treat. What to do in those cases with an MRSP-positive animal is a tougher
question, and we’re working on an answer to it at the moment.
Reprinted from Worms and Germs Blog with permission of Dr. Weese
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5138474&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754286855
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:24 AM MRSP Dogs and Spaying - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=5138474&ind=350&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Canine parvovirus. Reprinted
with permission by Jean-Yves
Sgro Copyright 1994 JY. Sgro
UW-Madison
Parvovirus in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 09, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
This virus was barely known before the 1970s, but in no time
became a major cause of canine death. Currently, it is primarily
a cause of severe illness and death for puppies and adolescent
dogs; fortunately, vaccinations are an effective route of
prevention if performed on the proper schedule.
Parvoviruses are a large group; almost every mammal species,
including humans, seems to have its own parvovirus.
Fortunately, each virus is specific, at least for the most part, for
which animal species it can infect (i.e. the pig parvovirus will not
infect people, the canine parvovirus will not infect pigs, etc.). For
this reason, when a dog or puppy in the family has a parvo
infection, the human family is safe. That said, the canine
parvovirus is not as specific as some of the other parvoviruses.
It will affect most members of the dog family (wolves, coyotes,
foxes, etc.) and there is a new mutation that can affect domestic cats (see below).
Parvoviruses are smaller than most viruses and consist of a protein coat (a capsid) and a
single strand of DNA inside. It is hard to believe that such a simply constructed organism
could be so deadly; however, this virus has proved especially effective at infection by
rapidly dividing host cells such as intestinal cells, bone marrow cells, cells of the lymph
system, and fetal cells. Parvoviruses are not enveloped in fat the way many other viruses
are. This makes parvoviruses especially hardy in the environment and difficult to disinfect
away.
While the parvoviruses of other species have been well-known for decades, the canine
parvovirus is a relative newcomer. The original canine parvovirus, discovered in 1967 and
called CPV-1 or "the minute virus of canines," did not represent much of a medical threat
except to newborn puppies, but by 1978, a new variant, CPV-2 appeared in the U.S. This
newer version seems to represent a mutation from the feline parvovirus (which is more
commonly known as the feline distemper virus though there is some controversy
regarding what the parent parvovirus actually was). Because this virus was, and is, shed
in gigantic numbers by infected animals, and because this virus is especially hardy in the
environment, worldwide distribution of the virus rapidly occurred. At this time, the virus is
considered to be "ubiquitous," meaning that it is in every environment unless some form of
regular disinfection is applied.
Attempting to shield a puppy from exposure is completely futile.
In 1978, no dog had any sort of immunity against this virus. There was no resistance and
the epidemic that resulted was disastrous. To make matters worse, a second mutation
creating CPV-2a had occurred by 1979, and it seemed to be even more aggressive. The

8/4/25, 11:24 AM Parvovirus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951463&ind=351&objTypeID=1007 1/3
vaccine was at a premium and many veterinarians had to make do with the feline
distemper vaccine as it was the closest related vaccine available while the manufacturers
struggled to supply the nation with true parvovirus vaccines.
Over 40 years have passed since then.
Now, the most common form of the virus is called CPV-2b. Virtually all dogs can be
considered to have been exposed to it at least to some extent, which means that most
adult dogs, even those inadequately vaccinated, can be considered to have at least some
immunity. It is also worth mentioning the new particularly virulent strain of parvovirus:
CPV-2c is rapidly becoming the second most common form of canine parvovirus. CPV-2c
was discovered in 2000 and is able to infect cats. Cats vaccinated against feline
distemper can be considered protected. Going back to dogs, currently available vaccines
for dogs cover all variants of canine parvovirus including CPV-2c as do all the
commercially available diagnostic test kits.
For more specific information about canine parvovirus-2c, see the following from the
American Veterinary Medical Association.
Learn more about the virus at Baker Institute for Animal Health, part of the Cornell
University College of Veterinary Medicine.
Parvoviral infection has become a disease almost exclusively in puppies and adolescent
dogs.
Parvoviral infection must be considered as a possible diagnosis in any young dog with
vomiting and/or diarrhea. With proper hospitalization, survival rates approach 80 percent.
Still, there are many myths and misunderstandings about this virus, how it is spread, and
how to prevent it. The purpose of this article series is to clear up these misconceptions
and provide the public with an accurate information source.
Related resources
Basic Virology - November 22, 2024
Parvovirus: Vaccination and Prevention - October 16, 2024
Parvovirus: How it Happens - October 5, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Physical Illness and Treatment - June 24, 2023
Parvovirus: Caring for the Recovered Dog - May 10, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - November 10, 2021
Parvovirus: Disinfecting the Environment - You are being redirected to updated information on
this topic - September 30, 2015
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951463&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754286878
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/4/25, 11:24 AM Parvovirus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951463&ind=351&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:24 AM Parvovirus in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951463&ind=351&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Photo courtesy of CDC Public Health
Image Library.
Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 10, 2021
Published: January 01, 2001
A puppy with bloody diarrhea could have a parasite problem, a virus other than
parvovirus, stress colitis, an intestinal foreign body, or may simply have eaten something
that disagreed with him. It is important to confirm the diagnosis of parvovirus before
embarking on what could be the wrong treatment.
Tests that Are Especially Useful
The Fecal Parvo ELISA Test
The ELISA test has become the most common test for parvovirus in puppies. ELISA
stands for Enzyme Linked ImmunoSorbent Assay. This sounds complicated and high tech
but is actually the same type of technology used in home pregnancy test kits. The parvo
ELISA test is available as a kit and is performed in the vet’s office in about 15 minutes or
less. There are many different brands and testing is sensitive in its ability to detect the
actual virus in stool. If a puppy is shedding parvovirus in their stool, that would indicate an
active infection.
The test has some limitations that are important to realize.
Recent vaccination with a live vaccine (the type of vaccine
that is most effective) may interfere with the test results.
This means that the test may detect the live virus from the
vaccine and show a positive reading when, in fact, the
puppy does not have a parvo infection. Classically, this
interference occurs 5 to 12 days after vaccination so if a
positive fecal ELISA test is obtained within this period after
vaccination, additional tests may be recommended.
A false negative result is possible. The puppy could be
infected but no longer shedding the virus in its stool or only
shedding the virus intermittently. Alternatively, the virus
particles may be so thoroughly coated with antibodies that
they cannot react with the test’s chemicals. Any test will
have some potential for false negatives as well as false
positives but if the puppy's clinical presentation fits and the
ELISA test is positive, treatment for parvo infection should
be pursued. In almost all cases, a negative ELISA reading
can be trusted, but it is important to realize that no test is
perfect.
The Drop in White Cell Count
Recall that one of the first actions of the canine parvovirus is to inhibit white blood cell
division in the bone marrow. The virus essentially turns the immune system off before
making its deadly way to the GI tract. This is a feature of parvovirus infection in all
species, which means that a characteristic drop in white blood cell count is seen on a

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951462&ind=352&objTypeID=1007 1/3
blood panel when the infection is active and real. If there is any question about the
veracity of an ELISA test result, the presence or absence of a white cell count drop can be
used to clarify the situation but it should be mentioned that the positive ELISA test often
precedes the white cell drop by a couple of days. White blood cell count is commonly
monitored through the treatment of infection. The white blood cell numbers bottom out
during the brunt of infection and recovery of the white blood cell numbers heralds
recovery.
Tests that are Hard to Interpret and Rarely Used (but you Might Hear About them so We'll
Explain them)
PCR Testing
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing is probably the newest method of testing for
parvo. A fecal sample must be submitted to a reference laboratory for PCR testing; this is
not the sort of test that can be done while you wait. The DNA of the parvovirus is
recognized and amplified so as to be able to detect even small amounts of it. PCR testing
is generally too sensitive to be clinically helpful yet canine parvovirus is commonly
included on PCR panels that test for multiple intestinal virus organisms. The problem with
PCR testing is that, because it amplifies DNA, very small amounts of virus can be
detected which means that positive results will turn up on dogs that are vaccinated or who
are passing insignificant amounts of virus. PCR testing is very helpful for many infections
but often clouds the issue for parvovirus.
Antibody Titers
There are two types of antibody titers that can be run: IgG and IgM. With the advent of
ELISA testing, titers are not frequently used in making this diagnosis anymore. The IgG
titer is a more long-lasting antibody level. A high IgG titer would probably indicate an
active infection in a puppy that is old enough to generate antibodies and who has not yet
received any vaccinations. Most of the time, the IgG titer simply reflects antibodies
generated by vaccination. The IgM titer reflects recent antibody production so if a
vaccinated puppy had not been vaccinated recently, a high IgM titer might indicate active
infection.
Because parvovirus-infected puppies have frequently received vaccinations in the recent
past and are frequently too young to generate their own antibodies (which is how
vaccinated puppies get infected in the first place), these test results are difficult to
interpret. It is easy to see why the ELISA test that directly detects the virus has become so
popular.
Titering is mostly used nowadays to determine if a dog has adequate protection against
parvo, either through vaccination or prior exposure. In a shelter setting, a dog of unknown
vaccination status can be tested to determine if he is considered protected from infection
or not. In the pet setting, a dog can be tested to determine if a vaccine is needed or not.
Certain antibody levels are associated with protection; however, because of other
contributing branches of the immune system, an inadequate titer does not necessarily
mean a dog is vulnerable.
Biopsy
Parvovirus lesions in the GI tract are of a classical appearance. There is no mistaking
them under the microscope. Unfortunately, tissue samples of the GI tract are not readily
available and most infected puppies are not good surgical candidates. Still, if a puppy has
died and the cause is unclear, submitting samples of the GI tract can generally confirm or
rule out a parvovirus diagnosis provided the tissue has not degenerated.
It is also important to realize that puppies with parvovirus infection may have
concurrent intestinal parasites or may have swallowed foreign bodies.

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951462&ind=352&objTypeID=1007 2/3
There will be complicated conditions that must be monitored. This means that other tests
will be required during the management of the parvo patient. The above tests are simply
those that can be used to confirm the parvovirus diagnosis.
Related resources
Basic Virology - November 22, 2024
Parvovirus: Vaccination and Prevention - October 16, 2024
Parvovirus in Dogs - April 9, 2024
Parvovirus: How it Happens - October 5, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Physical Illness and Treatment - June 24, 2023
Parvovirus: Caring for the Recovered Dog - May 10, 2023
Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - November 10, 2021
Parvovirus: Disinfecting the Environment - You are being redirected to updated information on
this topic - September 30, 2015
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951462&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754286903
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Parvovirus Infection: Diagnosis - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951462&ind=352&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Physaloptera worm vomited up by a cat. Photo courtesy of Dr.
Brandi Bogner
Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats
Stephanie Cruz-Rincon, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Published: November 16, 2020
Worms are parasites that live inside your
pet’s body and steal nutrients away from
them. They do so by either directly eating
your pet’s tissue or feeding from their
blood vessels. Different worms can
inhabit different parts of your pet’s body
from their lungs to their gastrointestinal
system. Depending on the specific worm
and your individual pet’s health, worms
can cause little to no disease or serious
sickness. Some worms cause anemia,
others diarrhea, and in serious cases
others can cause death if left untreated.
It is also possible for your canine and
feline companions to be infected with
multiple types of worms at the same
time, resulting in more severe sickness.
Thus, it is important to work with your
veterinarian to prevent your animals from getting infected in the first place and receiving
treatment quickly if they do.
What are Physaloptera?
Physaloptera are a specific type of worm that affects cats and dogs. Also called stomach
worms, they live mainly in the stomach and beginning of the small intestine of your furry
companions. Adult stomach worms are stout, pink to tan in color and 3-6 cm in length.
Once ingested by your cat or dog, stomach worms attach themselves to their stomach or
small intestine where they feed off your pet’s tissue and blood. Stomach worms use their
mouths, which are equipped with several sets of teeth, to bite into your pet’s tissue.
Despite this damage, some cats and dogs do not show signs of disease when infected
while others may have chronic intermittent vomiting, weight loss, and anorexia. Infection
with Physaloptera are rare but most common in the Midwestern U.S., particularly in pets
with access to the outdoors.
How are Physaloptera different from other worms?
There are many different types of worms that affect the gastrointestinal tract of cats and
dogs. Among these, stomach worms are the only worms to predominately live in the
stomach of their feline and canine hosts. Other worms, such as tapeworms and
hookworms, mainly occupy the small intestines of dogs and cats. Moreover, unlike
roundworms, stomach worms do not seem to have a predisposition for infecting certain
age groups over others. In terms of feeding, stomach worms are similar to hookworms as

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9937047&ind=357&objTypeID=1007 1/3
both have teeth they use to bite into tissue, but stomach worms feed off both tissue and
blood whereas hookworms only consume the latter. Finally, stomach worms are less likely
than many other worms to cause sickness but when they do vomiting is common.
How does my pet get infected?
Physaloptera are maintained in wildlife carnivore species such as coyotes, wolves, foxes,
bobcats and raccoons among others in North America. These wild carnivores pass
stomach worm eggs in their feces. Other hosts ingest these eggs and become infected.
These intermediate hosts include the German cockroach, field cricket, camel cricket, flour
beetle, and ground beetles. Additionally, some small animals can eat these intermediate
insect hosts and become infected; these include rodents, hedgehogs, lizards, frogs and
snakes. Your pet can be infected by eating any of these infected insects or animals.
Fortunately, your dog or cat cannot get infected by ingesting worm eggs in the
environment or through interaction with affected wildlife carnivores.
Disease Caused
Once Physaloptera worms are ingested by your pet via an infected host, these worms
attach themselves to the lining of your pet’s stomach or small intestine. From there,
Physaloptera will feed on your pet’s tissue and ingest blood. As they move from one
feeding site to another, they may cause bleeding wounds and inflammation. Despite this,
some pets may not show any signs of disease. On the other hand, other pets may have
chronic widespread inflammation of their stomach, which results in vomiting, anorexia and
dark sticky feces with partially digested blood (melena). Vomiting, particularly chronic and
intermittent, is the most common sign of infection and may contain one or more worms.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of Physaloptera can be difficult. One method is looking for stomach worm eggs
using a fecal float. While a positive result means your pet is infected, a negative result
does not rule them out because pets infected with stomach worms often have a low
number of worms, sometimes as low as one. Thus, a fecal float may not accurately
determine whether your pet has stomach worms or not.
Another method to diagnose stomach worms in your pets is to observe their vomit for any
worms or eggs. It may be helpful to take pictures if you do see worms so your veterinarian
can correctly identify them. Stomach worms in your pet’s vomit is diagnostic but lack of
them does not rule out infection.
It is highly unlikely you will see stomach worms or their eggs in your pet’s feces. If you do
notice something suspicious it would be a good idea to collect the poop in a bag and bring
it in to your veterinarian to be examined more closely. When collecting feces, get a fresh
sample no more than 24 hours old and as free as possible of grass, gravel, litter and other
materials. In general, collecting feces that appear to have abnormal material or any
eggs/worms is a good idea. Whether it turns out to be stomach worms or not, your pet
may have some sort of parasite that needs to be addressed.
Finally, endoscopy can be used to diagnose stomach worms. While a much more
expensive option than other methods, endoscopy allows your veterinarian to directly
visualize and remove worms in your pet’s gastrointestinal tract. It is possible to miss
worms, however, as they may be hidden by mucus, ingested food, and stomach folds.
Thus, it is also possible to miss a diagnosis with this method as well.
Given the difficulty in diagnosing stomach worms, some veterinarians decide to treat your
pet for them without confirming the diagnosis if there is high suspicion otherwise.
Treatment and Prognosis
Treatment involves either physical removal of worms by endoscopy followed by
anthelmintic therapy or anthelmintic therapy alone (anthelmintics kill worms).

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9937047&ind=357&objTypeID=1007 2/3
An endoscopy allows simultaneous diagnosis and treatment because worms can be
visualized and removed at the same time. If all the worms are found and removed, then
your pet’s symptoms may resolve sooner than with anthelmintic therapy alone.
Endoscopy, however, is more expensive and is not always reliable. Stomach worms can
be difficult to visualize, particularly immature larvae which are small and easily
overlooked. Thus, endoscopy used in combination with anthelmintic therapy gives the
added benefit of providing a definitive diagnosis when stomach worms are found.
Because the diagnosis of stomach worms is particularly challenging, it is often appropriate
to treat your pet for stomach worms without performing endoscopy or finding eggs on a
fecal float. This option is more economic and will eliminate any stomach worms if your pet
has any. One drawback is that this option will likely not be effective if your pet does not
have stomach worms and is instead sick for another reason. Drugs used to kill stomach
worms in your cat or dog include ivermectin, pyrantel pamoate, and fenbendazole.
Additional drugs that may be beneficial for your pet include anti-nausea medications to
reduce their vomiting and gastroprotectants.
With appropriate therapy, prognosis is excellent. Success of therapy can be monitored by
resolution of your pet’s symptoms, repeated fecal exams, or repeated gastric endoscopy
examinations. Out of all these ways to track your pet’s response to therapy, monitoring
whether their symptoms improve and eventually go away is the most economic and
reliable. Stomach worms’ eggs are difficult to find on fecal floats and a negative result
does not mean your pet is not infected. Similarly, while endoscopy is more reliable it is still
not completely accurate and can miss worms. Thus, if your pet is not back to their regular,
healthy self by the end of their medication course, it’s time to go back to your veterinarian.
Your pet likely has some other problem that needs to be addressed.
Prevention
The best way to reduce your dog or cat’s risk of being infected with stomach worms is to
prevent them from eating the insects and animals that carry the worms, which includes
preventing them from hunting and scavenging. You can do so by keeping your cat indoors
and your dog on a leash or in a fenced yard to limit their contact with infected animals.
With this in mind, small beetles and other insects can find their way into your home and
thus there is always a possibility your pet can become infected.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9937047&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754286945
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:25 AM Physaloptera (Stomach Worm) in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9937047&ind=357&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Positive Snap Tests for Ehrlichia and Anaplasma
Becky Lundgren, DVM; Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: February 04, 2020
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis are bacterial diseases dogs get that are spread by tick
bites. The disease can be a little different depending on the individual bacterial species,
but treatment is generally the same. Certain species of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis can
be infectious to humans as well, generally through a tick bite.
Bacterial species that cause ehrlichiosis are Ehrlichia ewingii, Ehrlichia chaffeensis, and
Ehrlichia canis. Species that cause anaplasmosis are Anaplasma phagocytophilum and
Anaplasma platys.
Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis look similar when your veterinarian gives a physical
examination. Low platelet count (thrombocytopenia) is common, which may lead to
bruising or abnormal bleeding. Ehrlichiosis and certain species of Anaplasma can also
cause a low red blood cell count, what we call anemia, which can appear as pale skin and
gums or cause a pet to act tired. Swollen or painful joints may also be seen with
ehrlichiosis and some anaplasmosis infections. All of these symptoms can occur suddenly,
or they may happen off and on over time.
Because these diseases are caused by ticks and can lead to pretty serious illnesses in
dogs and people, testing methods were created to quickly screen for these organisms in
pets. The most common test is an IDEXX Snap® test, which can be performed in minutes
by veterinarians in general practice clinics or hospitals. Snap tests use a small blood
sample to determine if the pet has created antibodies against Anaplasma spp. and
Ehrlichia spp. Antibodies are proteins in the blood that are created when a pet's body is
exposed to bacteria and viruses so as to help fight that infection. Each antibody is made
specifically for the virus or bacteria the body was exposed to. Even after the infection is
gone, these antibodies will remain in the blood stream. This is partly why people and pets
become immune to certain illnesses after they get sick.
Unfortunately, Snap tests are not 100% accurate and results can be a bit confusing. Tests
can sometimes be negative even if the pet has the infection. This could be because the
pet was only recently infected and hasn’t had time to build up enough antibodies to make
the test positive.
Sometimes Snap tests are positive when a pet is not infected. This is usually because the
pet was exposed to the bacteria from a tick bite. Even though the pet didn’t develop an
infection, their body made enough antibodies to protect itself just in case. Remember that
positive Snap tests only mean that antibodies to ehrlichiosis or anaplasmosis are in the
bloodstream. The tests can’t tell whether the bacteria themselves are in the pet’s body.
Snap tests can also be positive if a pet is a carrier of infection, meaning they are infected
but not showing any symptoms. Many carriers never show signs of infection. It is not fully
clear why this happens, which can be confusing and worrisome for many pet owners.
A history of tick bites, symptoms, and abnormal findings on a physical exam need to be
taken into account to determine if the pet is truly infected or not. Blood tests to check the
platelet and red blood cell count can be done to see if the pet is experiencing active

8/4/25, 11:26 AM Positive Snap Tests for Ehrlichia and Anaplasma - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9494666&ind=358&objTypeID=1007 1/2
infection (as opposed to being a carrier of infection). Additional testing can be sent out if a
true diagnosis is needed. These types of tests can also determine which specific type of
anaplasmosis or ehrlichiosis infections the pet has.
A pet with a normal checkup who shows no symptoms but has a positive Snap test can be
monitored. This means you will need to keep an eye open for new symptoms and physical
changes, but you don't need to do anything else. In some cases, if the pet’s tests and
symptoms are suspicious for an active infection your veterinarian may prescribe a course
of antibiotics. Your veterinarian will help you decide whether additional testing is
necessary.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9494666&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754286970
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:26 AM Positive Snap Tests for Ehrlichia and Anaplasma - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=9494666&ind=358&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 20, 2025
Published: June 05, 2005
First, an Anatomy Lesson
Pyothorax happens in an area of the chest called the pleural space. Thorax is another
way of saying chest cavity. Chest cavities contain the heart and lungs, and other important
organs: the esophagus transverses the entire chest cavity to get to the stomach; some
large blood vessels come off the heart; the trachea (windpipe) connects to the lungs, etc.
But all these important organs aren't just packed in there; they are organized.
A structure called the mediastinum separates the chest cavity into right and left (sort of the
way your nasal septum divides your nasal cavity into right and left). Inside the
mediastinum, the heart, large vessels, esophagus, and any other central organs all rest so
that they don't go flopping around whenever you roll over or turn in a circle. The lungs fill
in the right and left sides of the chest cavity but keep in mind they are not attached to the
chest wall directly. They mostly fill the space but not completely.
The space around the lungs is the pleural space.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952287&ind=360&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Cat bite wound. Photo courtesy of MarVistaVet
A foxtail that has been removed surgically.
courtesy of Dr. Jean Battig
The canine pleural cavity and its contents. The pleural space is shown in yellow. Illustration by VIN.
The pleural space normally contains less than a teaspoon of fluid for lubrication. In
disease, the pleural can fill with any of the following fluids:
Air (pneumothorax)
Blood (hemothorax)
Lymph (chylothorax)
Clear fluid (hydrothorax)
Pus (pyothorax)
The Story of Pyothorax
Normally, the pleural space is small, as most of the chest cavity is taken up by the
expanding lungs. A small amount of fluid is there for lubrication purposes. If fluid actually
fills the pleural space, however, it becomes difficult for the lungs to expand as there simply
is not enough room in the chest for lots of fluid in addition to air-filled lungs.
The patient cannot breathe and begins using abdominal muscles to help with breathing.
Breaths become labored, rapid, and shallow; the extra effort is usually visible if you watch
the patient's breathing. Because the fluid is so inflammatory, there is usually a fever. The
pet is listless, will not eat, and has effortful rapid breathing.
How Does Pus Get into the Pleural Space?
In cats, the problem usually starts as a bite
wound. The bite may penetrate the chest
cavity outright, and deposit bacteria into the
pleural space where abscessation occurs, or
the bite may abscess externally but
eventually rupture inward. In either case, the
result is a bacterial infection in the pleural
space and the formation of pus.
In
dogs,
the
problem usually starts as a piece of plant material,
such as a foxtail, which is inhaled and works its way
into the pleural space and deposits bacteria as it
tracks along. The infection generates inflammation
and pus. This situation tends to be more complicated
than in cats as it involves an actual foreign body that
must be removed to resolve the pyothorax (see
later). Extra fluid is produced and overwhelms the
normal fluid drainage conduits so that fluid
production and drainage are no longer in balance.
Soon the entire pleural space is filled with pus. The
patient has difficulty breathing and the toxic, inflammatory material in the fluid creates
fever, listlessness, and death is expected without treatment.
Other causes of pyothorax include rupture of the esophagus, bacterial pneumonia leading
to rupture of a lung abscess, or lung parasites.
Diagnosis is confirmed when the chest is tapped with a needle and pus is taken from
inside the chest cavity. The pus is generally cultured to get a better handle on what
organisms are in it and thus which antibiotics are likely to be the most helpful.
Treatment

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952287&ind=360&objTypeID=1007 2/4
A normal chest cavity. Photo courtesy of
MarVistaVet
This cat has an effusion in its pleural cavity.
In this case the fluid is chyle, not pus, but
pyothorax might look the same. Photo
courtesy of MarVistaVet
Pyothorax is one
of those
conditions where
the prognosis
can be
reasonably good,
assuming the
patient is not too
far gone when
brought to the
veterinarian, as
long as
aggressive
treatment is pursued. If you try to go with inexpensive
alternatives to proper treatment, a poor outcome is
likely. So what is needed to “do this disease right"?
In-dwelling chest tubes are placed (usually one on each side of the chest). This
generally demands 24-hour hospitalization.
Fluid is flushed into the tubes, and the pus is drained out several times daily.
Intravenous antibiotics geared towards both anaerobic and aerobic growing
bacteria are required (or antibiotics are selected based on culturing the pus).
Ideally, some kind of advanced imaging is taken to see if surgery is required,
such as an abscessed lung lobe harboring an inhaled foxtail or a physical
structure on the internal chest wall that harbors the infection, such as a brokenoff twig, etc. If a foreign body or abscessed internal structure is inside the chest,
it has to be removed, which adds tremendous expense but may be the only
way to resolve the pyothorax.
Less likely to be adequate would be:
Periodically tapping the chest with a needle to withdraw the pus. This will
probably not provide enough drainage.
Oral antibiotics without beginning with intravenous antibiotics in the initial
stages.
Leaving a chest tube unattended overnight. If the tube unclamps, the patient’s
chest cavity becomes open to the outside atmosphere. When this occurs, the
patient cannot breathe. In hospitals that do not offer overnight care, the tube
can be clamped and wrapped but an industrious animal can potentially chew
through these safeguards and the owner should understand this risk if the
patient is left alone overnight.
Antibiotics alone without some kind of chest drainage will not be effective.
After the fluid has stopped re-forming and the patient has a good appetite, the tubes are
withdrawn, and the patient can go home. Antibiotics are given for many weeks to ensure
that this very deep infection is cleared. If the infection is not completely cleared,
recurrence is possible. In a review of several pyothorax studies, recurrence rates ranged
from 0 to 14 percent in cats and 11.6 percent in dogs. Positive outcome/recovery was
achieved in 58-100 percent of the patients, depending on the study.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952287&ind=360&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Pyothorax is a life-threatening condition, and death can be expected without
treatment. Proper treatment requires critical care, which may be expensive, but
has a fair chance of success (63%-95% survival depending on the study, assuming
proper chest tubes are used).
Surviving patients will need several weeks of medication at home. Some patients
will require surgery.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952287&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754287025
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pyothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952287&ind=360&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer,
Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Published: November 22, 2010
Pythiosis is caused by a fungal-like aquatic organism called Pythium insidiosum. This
organism is not a true fungus, but behaves somewhat similarly. It exists in stagnant water,
or on grasses that have been exposed to the stagnant water.
The disease is most common in tropical and sub-tropical climates such as Southeast Asia,
eastern coastal Australia, South America, and the USA. (In the USA, it is seen mostly in
the Gulf Coast states, although it has been found in more diverse areas such as
Wisconsin, Kentucky, Missouri, Indiana, North Carolina, California, and Washington.)
In the USA, the disease tends to be seasonal, and most cases occur between August and
December.
Pythiosis in Dogs
In dogs, pythiosis can occur as the cutaneous (skin), gastrointestinal (stomach and
intestine), or multisystemic form. The skin form occurs when the organism comes in
contact with an open wound. The gastrointestinal form occurs when the dog ingests the
organism.
In the skin form of the disease, signs include wounds that won’t heal, ulcerated small
lumps, and fistulas (small tunnel-like passages in body tissue). Hairless lesions are found
most commonly on the tail, legs, stomach, neck, and face. These hairless lesions are
perforated by draining fistulas. The lesions are itchy and damage from self-mutilation is
common.
Gastrointestinal pythiosis occurs most often in the stomach, proximal small intestine, and
ileocolic junction, but any part of the intestine, esophagus, and colon can be diseased.
Clinical signs include anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss. The weight loss can
be severe, but affected dogs usually do not appear systemically ill until late in the disease.
Pythiosis in Cats
Pythiosis in cats is rare, and usually occurs as either cutaneous or nasopharyngeal
lesions.
The skin lesions in cats are less invasive and destructive than in dogs, but do include the
non-healing wounds, ulcerated skim lumps, draining fistulas, and pruritus.
Pythiosis in Horses
In horses, the lesions are large nodules (roughly circular, granulomatous, ulcerated, and
fistulated) or subcutaneous swellings with yellow-gray necrotic cores. The lesions are
most common on the legs - especially the lower limbs - abdomen, chest, and genitalia, all
of which are areas of the body that would come in contact with infected water or grass.
The lesions are itchy, so self-trauma is common.
The horse’s bones may become infected as the disease becomes chronic.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952986&ind=361&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Enteric (intestinal) pythiosis in horses is characterized by fibrosis and narrowing of the
gastrointestinal tract.
Diagnosis
Early diagnosis is necessary for effective treatment and survival.
Diagnosis is most often based on histopathology tests, as well as PCR and ELISA assays.
It can be difficult to culture Pythium. It does not grow well on routine fungal culture media,
and rapid bacterial overgrowth often occurs on bacterial culture media, skewing the
results.
Treatment in Dogs
Once the correct diagnosis is made, surgery to remove affected tissue, leaving wide
margins, can be effective for both the skin and gastrointestinal forms. The surgery will not
cure the dog if it does not completely eliminate all of the lesions. Limb amputation may be
necessary. After amputation, antifungal drugs should be given for two to four months.
With gastrointestinal pythiosis, complete surgical excision is the treatment of choice, but
the disease is often too extensive at the time of diagnosis to allow complete resection.
After resection, medical therapy for gastrointestinal pythiosis should include itraconazole
and terbinafine given for six to nine months. However, only 10 – 20 percent of dogs
respond.
Treatment with amphotericin B lipid complex can also be attempted. Approximately 20% of
dogs will respond to long-term therapy.
Treatment in Cats
Complete surgical excision of small or accessible lesions can be effective. Medical
therapy rarely works.
Treatment in Horses
Complete surgical excision of small or accessible lesions can be effective.
Prognosis
Prognosis for most cases of pythiosis is poor, and the relative newness of the disease and
lack of early testing for P. insidiosum is probably responsible for that. Medical therapy has
been frustrating, with only 20 - 25% of canine cases showing a positive response. A
positive response to treatment is usually defined as a resolution of clinical signs and
weight gain. However, caught early enough, the disease is treatable.
Factors that influence the prognosis include size and site of lesion and duration of
infection. Small lesions of short duration that have not invaded critical structures usually
respond best to treatment.
Following amputation of an infected limb or excision of a gastrointestinal mass, the ELISA
assay may be performed every 2 to 3 months to help detect recurrence. A dramatic
decrease in the titer is usually noted 2 to 3 months after successful surgical resection.
Persistently high titers often indicate a strong possibility of recurrence.
The disease is often fatal in animals that have lesions that cannot be completely excised
or that have multisystemic disease.
Lagenidiosis in Dogs
Lagenidiosis is characterized by cutaneous lesions and enlarged lymph nodes. The
infection causes inflammation of the blood vessels, allowing the disease to spread via the
bloodstream. The lymph nodes, lungs, and large blood vessels may then become
affected. The vasculitis may result in aneurysms that can suddenly rupture, causing
sudden death.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952986&ind=361&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Diagnosis, treatment, and prognosis are similar to those for pythiosis, but prognosis
currently is worse than that for pythiosis.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952986&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754287053
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:27 AM Pythiosis (Oomycosis, Lagenidiosis, Swamp Cancer, Bursatti, Leeches) in Dogs, Cats and Horses - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952986&ind=361&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Raccoon
Rabies in Animals
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: March 29, 2025
Published: January 01, 2001
Click here for a summary.
Descriptions of rabies go back thousands of years,
as rabies has classically been one of the most
feared infections of all time.
It is because of rabies that dog ownership virtually
everywhere in the U.S. requires a license and
documentation of rabies vaccination. There is still
no reliably effective treatment for rabies infection
once symptoms have started. In other words, if you
get rabies and it progresses to showing symptoms,
you will almost certainly die within days, and even
in the 21st century, this remains true. The virus
does not survive very long outside of the infected
host, so transmission requires direct contact with
fresh secretions. In most cases, this means a bite
wound, and it usually involves wildlife infecting
other wildlife with no humans or pets involved.
When wildlife starts coming into contact with the pet population, pets become infected,
and when pets get infected, human infection is not far behind. Because this infection has
nearly 100% mortality, preventing it in pets becomes crucial to preventing it in people. Of
course, people can get infected by wildlife contact as well. Despite vaccination being
readily available, every year, the U.S. reports approximately 50 canine deaths, 250 feline
deaths, and several human deaths from rabies. Worldwide, some 55,000 human deaths
occur annually from rabies in the 21st century.
The most common wildlife species to spread rabies to domestic animals and humans in
the Northern Hemisphere are skunks, bats, raccoons, foxes, and coyotes. Wildlife
(especially bats) can gain access to indoor areas where they can come in close contact
with both pets and people. Indoor pets are not without risk.
Many people do not realize how fast death occurs from rabies.
While it may take a long time for the virus to incubate, once even mild symptoms begin,
death occurs within 10 days.
The injection treatment most people have heard of only works during the incubation
period; once symptoms have started, survival chances are slim.
The Course of the Disease

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 1/6
Red fox
Skunk
The virus in the infected animal's saliva enters the victim's
tissues during the bite. The virus attaches to the local
muscle cells for a couple of days before penetrating local
nerves and beginning its slow ascent to the brain. Once
within nervous tissue, the virus is not accessible to the
immune system and may safely proceed toward the brain.
The journey is slow and can take up to a year, but the
average time is three to eight weeks, depending on the
species. After the virus enters the brain, it only takes two to
three more days for it to become evident in all body
secretions, including saliva. At this point, all fresh body
secretions can transmit the rabies virus, and symptoms begin.
It can take up to a year from the time of the initial bite before symptoms begin to
show. In dogs, typical incubation periods are 21-80 days. In cats, it's 28-42
days. Once symptoms show, treatment is nearly impossible.
Prodromal Stage (The First Two to Three Days After Symptoms Have Started)
A personality change is noted. Friendly animals become shy, etc. The larynx begins to
spasm, and a voice change may be noted (especially in rabid cattle). Most infected
animals will actively lick or scratch the site of the original bite.
Excitative Stage (Next One to Two Days)
Classically, this would be the "mad dog" stage, though most animals skip this phase
altogether. The animal has no fear and suffers from hallucinations. If confined, the animal
often attacks the cage bars.
Paralytic or Dumb Stage (Next Two to Four Days)
Weakness/paralysis sets in. The larynx is paralyzed, resulting in an inability to swallow,
thus drooling and "foaming at the mouth" result. The animal dies when the breathing
muscles are paralyzed. It is from animals in this stage where most human exposure
occurs. There is no treatment for animals or humans once clinical signs appear.
Once the virus has been released to body secretions, it is
again accessible to the immune system; however, the
patient dies before an adequate immune response is
mounted.
The classical symptoms of rabies described above may not
be recognizable, making diagnosis difficult, if not
impossible, in a living animal. Long quarantines are often
needed to determine if the infection has occurred.
When human exposure to the animal in question is
involved, what happens depends on several criteria. If the
animal in question is dead, its brain can be tested for rabies. There is no test for rabies in
a living animal, but since it is known that death follows quickly after the virus becomes
contagious, a living animal can be confined for 10 days. If the animal is still alive 10 days
after biting a person, then the bite could not have transmitted rabies.
Prevention
For Your Pets
Happily, rabies prevention is accomplished with vaccination and limiting exposure to
wildlife. The standard killed virus vaccines are available for both dogs and cats, and after
the initial dose, which is good for one year, subsequent doses are generally good for three
years. Because tumors have developed in cats who received the killed virus vaccine, a

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Coyote
recombinant product is now available that uses a portion of rabies viral DNA cloned into a
harmless canarypox virus. This arrangement allows the pet to realize the benefits of live
virus vaccination without any risk of exposure to the living rabies virus.
Rabies vaccination protocols are typically controlled by municipal regulations. Most
communities legally require the vaccination of all dogs. The American Association of
Feline Practitioners recommends rabies vaccination as a core vaccine for all pet cats.
For pets not current on rabies vaccination that have been exposed to biting wildlife, the
Texas Post-Exposure Rabies Prophylaxis Protocol has been particularly helpful. In this
situation, the pet should be vaccinated for rabies as soon as possible after the wildlife bite,
and booster vaccines should be given three weeks post-bite and eight weeks post-bite.
The pet should be strictly isolated for 90 days. This protocol has been extremely
successful in preventing rabies symptoms and contagion when normal rabies vaccination
has lapsed.
Treatment for Humans (Post Exposure Prophylaxis or PEP)
As mentioned, once symptoms have started, treatment can be
attempted, but truly, there is little chance of survival. The only
way to survive rabies is to exploit the long incubation period
and basically get vaccinated quickly. Doing this involves a very
big piece of information: knowing you were (or may have
been) exposed. Every year, a small number of people die of
rabies in the U.S. Most of these people were bitten by a dog,
bat, or some other animal and did nothing other than basic first
aid. Recall that it takes many weeks for the rabies virus to
reach the brain. This allows time for the vaccine to be given so
that when the virus "comes out" of its neurologic hiding place
and is ready to infect the brain, a substantial immunologic
response is waiting. The virus is foiled, and clinical rabies
does not result.
If you are bitten by an animal and its rabies vaccination history
is unknown, there are definite steps to take. A fresh bite wound
should be washed out with water quickly, as this may wash out
viral particles. The time it takes for the virus to reach the brain
depends on the amount of the virus and how close the wound
is to the head. This simple step can be life-saving.
If the biting animal is alive, its vaccination status should be
confirmed as soon as possible, and it will need to be confined
according to local law. The bite wound should be reported to the health department as
soon as possible. Only rodent and rabbit bites are not reportable.
If the animal is dead, its brain can be tested for rabies. The head of the biting animal is
submitted to the health department for fluorescent antibody testing for the rabies virus.
This process takes a matter of hours, so any bite victims can know right away if they will
require rabies treatment.
If the animal is not available or its vaccination status is in question, further treatment may
be needed. Hyperimmune (antibody-rich) serum is flushed into the wound in the hope of
inactivating the virus before it penetrates the nerves. The patient receives a vaccination
on a regular schedule for about a month, as described above.
Veterinarians have a rabies exposure risk of more than 300 times that of the general
population.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 3/6
Rabies virus
Anyone pursuing a career with animals should consider vaccination against
rabies.
The Law Regarding Animal Bites (Against Humans)
In the U.S., states and counties have different
regulations regarding rabies vaccines for
companion animals and bites to humans.
Regulations for your area in the U.S. can be found
through your county's health department. In almost
all states in the U.S., the biting animal must be
confined for observation for 10 days at the owner's
expense, regardless of vaccination status.
The quarantine period is to determine whether the
rabies virus was present in the animal's saliva at the
time of the bite.
An animal infected with rabies and shedding virus will certainly be dead within ten days.
One might want to know why quarantine is still necessary if the animal is vaccinated, and
the answer has to do with the seriousness of a rabies infection. No vaccine is 100%
effective, so it is important to be certain in order to prevent human exposure.
The situation is different if the biting animal is known to have been exposed to wildlife. A
vaccinated animal must be re-vaccinated within the time period required by local
regulations and confined for observation for the specified duration. Unvaccinated animals
may be confined for a specified time period according to local/regional law or be
euthanized and tested for rabies. In the U.S., all bites to humans that break the skin are
reportable to local health departments. Rabies vaccination requirements vary from state to
state and county to county. Contact your veterinarian if you think your pet has come into
contact with or been bitten by a wild animal. Regardless of the vaccination status of your
pet, wild animal bites may lead to painful wounds and infection.
Again, laws regarding biting dogs and rabies vaccination are highly
regional. Check with your local animal regulation department, your veterinarian,
or visit rabiesaware.org to find out what you need to know in the U.S..
Quarantines when Traveling
Great Britain, Hawaii, Japan, New Zealand, and several other island areas have
successfully eradicated rabies from their territory. These places are EXTREMELY cautious
about allowing in potential carriers of rabies. A very long quarantine is needed because of
the long incubation period of rabies; however, this must be balanced by the expense
associated with quarantine and owners' reluctance to be separated from their pets. Most
places that have eradicated rabies have protocols for avoiding or minimizing quarantine.
Typically, a microchip is implanted in the pet for identification purposes, a rabies antibody
titer (a measurement of vaccine-induced protection) must be performed at an approved
laboratory, and rabies vaccine documentation is necessary.
For listings of what each state requires for entry, go to the USDA.
For travel to another country, check with that country's consulate, but guidelines are also
available at USDA.
Other Links
The CDC's rabies home page has basic information and a children's education area that is
particularly helpful for families who go camping.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 4/6
The annual World Rabies Day calls attention to this problem to raise awareness and
provide information about rabies in both humans and animals.
In Summary:
You can’t treat rabies once symptoms set in; all you can do is prevent it.
Rabies is a virus transmitted through saliva or brain tissue. Without rapid preventive
treatment, it is almost always fatal. That’s why your pets are required to have rabies
vaccines in many areas of the world.
The most common wildlife species to spread rabies to animals and people in the
Northern Hemisphere are bats, skunks, raccoons, foxes, and coyotes.
It is generally caused by a bite wound, and wildlife is mostly infected.
Rabies affects a mammal’s central nervous system. It can take up to a year before
symptoms begin to show, but the average time is three to eight weeks depending on
the species. In dogs, the typical incubation period is 21-80 days. In cats, it's 28-42
days. Once symptoms begin, treatment is nearly impossible.
If you are bitten, you need a preventive injection immediately, as it only works during
the incubation period. Once even mild symptoms begin, death occurs within 10 days.
After symptoms have started:
First two to three days: a personality change is seen, and the larynx
spasms, resulting in a voice change.
Next one to seven days: this is the “mad dog” stage in which an animal
has no fear and suffers from hallucinations, but many skip this stage.
Next two to four days: weakness and paralysis set in. The larynx becomes
paralyzed so the animal cannot swallow, causing drooling and foaming at
the mouth.
The animal dies when the muscles that control breathing finally become
completely paralyzed. Most people get bitten in this stage.
Symptoms may not be obviously recognizable, making diagnosis difficult if not
impossible. As of the time of this writing, there is no diagnostic test for rabies in a
living animal.
What happens after people are exposed depends on the situation. If the animal is
dead, its head is sent to a laboratory so the brain tissue can be tested. In some
circumstances/locations, a living animal can be quarantined for 10 days at the
owner’s expense; if the animal is still alive, then the bite could not have transmitted
rabies.
The vaccine protocols are typically controlled by municipal regulations. Most
communities legally require all dogs to be vaccinated and recommend it for cats.
Vaccination requirements vary from state to state, and county to county.
Exposed pets not current on rabies vaccination should be given booster vaccines at
three and eight weeks post-bite. The pet should be strictly isolated for 90 days.
Exposed humans should wash the bite with water as it may wash out some virus
particles; the time it takes for the virus to reach the brain depends on the amount of
virus in addition to how close the wound is to the head. This step could save a life.
Animal bites need to be reported to local health departments.
Veterinarians have a rabies exposure risk of more than 300 times that of the general
population. Anyone in an animal-oriented job should consider preventive vaccination.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951479&pid=19239

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 5/6
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754287077
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rabies in Animals - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4951479&ind=362&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Resource Guarding in Dogs
Published: October 04, 2021
Samantha Zurlinden
What is resource guarding and why does it occur?
Resource guarding is a relatively common behavior problem in dogs. It is defined as a dog
using avoidance, threatening, or aggressive behaviors to retain control of food or other items
in front of a person or other animal.
Sometimes, the signs of resource guarding are subtle. In these cases, your dog may show
avoidance behavior or mild signs of aggression and anxiety such as stiff or crouched body
posture, pinned back ears, lip licking, and physically blocking access to the resource. The
aggression may escalate to more severe and overt signs of aggression such as growling,
snapping, or biting. Food and food-related items are the most common resources that are
guarded by dogs. However, any resource that is valuable to the dog may be guarded. This
includes but is not limited to toys, beds, furniture, bones, resting areas, and even certain
people. Resource guarding may have a genetic component and occurs in males or females
of any breed. This issue can develop at any age. Resource guarding may be an issue that
appears and progresses over time, or it may begin suddenly after a change in environment
or routine.
Resource guarding does not have anything to do with dominance. It is a common
misconception that dogs show aggression or develop behavior problems because they do
not understand their “place in the pack.” This misconception is problematic because it often
leads to training using force and punishment to show the dog who is “top dog.” However,
dominance in this sense has been scientifically debunked. Using force and punishment in a
situation like resource guarding often makes the behavior problem worse and can cause your
animal to fear you and damage your relationship. To successfully manage resource guarding,
we must change the underlying motivation and emotion behind the behavior (anxiety, fear,
frustration). Studies have shown that reward-based methods are more effective and humane
when managing behavior problems such as resource guarding.
To a degree, resource guarding can be considered a normal canine behavior since obtaining
resources is necessary for survival. However, just because it can be considered normal does
not make it desirable, safe, or acceptable in a household. Unfortunately, over time, dogs may
learn that their aggressive responses are effective at protecting their resources, so the
behavior will persist or even worsen. Additionally, if a dog’s mild signs of aggression are
ignored or punished, this can cause their behaviors to escalate to more severe forms of
aggression. For example, a dog may initially show mild signs such as freezing or hunching
over their resource with a stiff body posture. If this behavior is punished or ignored the dog
will likely realize subtle signs are not effective. In this situation, dogs are likely to escalate to
more overt forms of aggression, such as growling, snapping, or biting. Then it becomes more
challenging to manage and treat the issue.
How can my veterinarian help with Resource Guarding?

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10751715&ind=363&objTypeID=10 1/4
Your veterinarian may be able to help you with this problem themselves, or they may refer
you to a veterinary behaviorist. If you are experiencing this problem with your pet, it is
important that you discuss it with your veterinarian.
Resource guarding may be caused by an underlying medical issue, especially if the behavior
starts suddenly in an adult dog. Your veterinarian will complete a thorough physical exam
and may request further testing based on their findings to determine if there is a medical
issue. Sometimes medications can be helpful in the treatment of resource guarding
especially if anxiety is a cause for the behavior.
Photo courtesy of CattleDog Publishing
Treatment and Management: What to do:
Safety is the utmost priority. You may need to use tools such as baby gates,
crates, or exercise pens to separate the dog from people or other pets when the
object is nearby.
Separate pets from each other when resources are nearby.
Attempt to avoid clutter in your home so that it is possible to have more
control over things. You do not necessarily want to restrict access to the
resources or take them away completely, but you do want to control the
situation so your dog can get to their resources in a way that is safe for
everyone.
Identify all situations and resources that are guarded. Recording in a diary or on a
calendar may be useful. You may want to record information such as:
When/how often resource guarding is occurring
Who is the dog guarding the resource from?
What resources is the dog guarding?
What behaviors are you seeing from your dog during the incident?
Learn to understand and respect what your dog is telling you. Learn to recognize
dog body language and understand how it can escalate from more mild, subtle
signs of aggression (such as lip licking, stiff body posture, ears pinned back) to

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10751715&ind=363&objTypeID=10 2/4
the overt signs of aggression (growling, snapping, biting). If we respect dogs’ body
language when they show mild signs of anxiety and aggression, we can likely
avoid the behavior becoming more severe.
Make sure your dog gets enough exercise and play every day.
Behavior Modification
All household members must follow the same guidelines to manage this
behavior. It must be a collaborative effort.
Here are some examples of behavioral modification techniques that may be
used.
“Drop it”- Teach your dog to drop the item of value in exchange for a
higher-value item or treat.
Relaxation exercises- this is especially helpful if resting places or
certain people are guarded by the dog. With relaxation training, you can
teach your dog to relax other places than the valued resting spot or
away from the person that they guard. This can also include teaching a
“place” behavior such as to a mat or dog bed.
Basket muzzle training - training your dog to be comfortable wearing a
basket muzzle can be a useful tool to restrict access to certain
resources for some situations.
Be realistic about what you can expect from your dog and what you can
handle in your specific situation.
In rare and severe cases of resource guarding and aggression, euthanasia
may be considered a humane option for both the dog’s welfare and human
safety.
Treatment and Management: What NOT to do:
Do not use force or punishment to attempt to correct this behavior.
Do not attempt to remove the resource of value from your dog as this could lead
to injury.
Your dog’s resource guarding behavior may never diminish completely resulting in
long-term management To reduce the behavior.
Prevention and Avoidance
Expose puppies to a wide range of toys and encourage them to share by calmly
exchanging toys during play.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10751715&ind=363&objTypeID=10 3/4
Train verbal cues such as “Drop it”, “Trade”, and “Leave it” using positive
reinforcement training before resource guarding develops.
Provide your dog with a safe, comfortable space such as a crate or exercise pen
that is only for your dog. It is important to not play with your dog’s food or put your
hand in the bowl while eating. It is always important to add something like a
special treat when humans are in close proximity to the bowl.
The treatment of resource guarding needs to be highly individualized for each dog and
household. These dogs often need a combination of behavioral modification, training, and
environmental and management changes.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10751715&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754287105
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=10751715&ind=363&objTypeID=10 4/4

The female Rocky Mountain wood tick (left) has a scutum (a shield) that covers only a small part
of her back, while the male’s scutum covers his entire back. Photo courtesy of CDC.
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: April 25, 2019
Published: July 21, 2014
Rocky
Mountain
spotted fever
(RMSF) is
caused by
Rickettsia
rickettsii. This
intracellular
parasite is
transmitted to
dogs through
the bite of an
infected tick.
The ticks that
can transmit
RMSF are the
Rocky
Mountain
wood tick, the American dog tick, and the brown dog tick.
In the United States, RMSF is most common in the southern Atlantic states, western
central states, and areas of the mid-Atlantic and southern New England coastal states.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), only about 1 to 3
percent of the tick population carries R. rickettsii, even in those geographic areas.
Prior research indicated that the infected tick must be attached for at least 2 hours in order
to transmit disease. Research in Brazil demonstrated that unfed ticks had to be attached
for more than 10 hours for transmission to occur, whereas fed ticks could transmit disease
within as little as 10 minutes after attachment. These results may indicate that
transmission across all tick species could occur earlier than once thought, depending on
when the tick has last eaten. Transmission of the Rickettsia can then occur due to the bite
or from exposure to the parasite while handling the tick.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs will show up 2 to 14 days after the bite occurred. The parasite creates an
inflammation of the body's small blood vessels, which results in damage to all the organs
of the body.
Common signs include fever, lethargy, inappetence, pain, eye/nose discharge, nosebleed,
cough, enlarged lymph nodes, lameness, skin necrosis/sloughing, hemorrhage, and
peripheral swelling. Petechial hemorrhages (tiny hemorrhages in the skin) will occur in
about 20% of affected dogs. Up to one third of the infected dogs will have central nervous
system signs (lack of voluntary coordination of muscle movements, weakness, balance

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6370902&ind=365&objTypeID=1007 1/3
problems, cranial nerve abnormalities, seizures, stupor, spinal pain, etc.). Any organ in the
body may be affected and the clinical signs may be mild or severe enough to result in
death.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic tests for RMSF include blood tests looking for severely low platelet count, plus
coagulation profiles, blood chemical analysis, and serology. (Paired titers, from blood
samples taken 14 to 21 days apart, are often needed, but a single high titer in dogs that
have clinical signs is consistent with an active infection.) Response to antibiotic therapy is
suggestive, but not diagnostic.
Treatment/Management
Specific treatment relies on the use of appropriate antibiotics. Response to the antibiotics
usually is seen within 24 to 48 hours, although advanced cases may not respond at all to
treatment. The most common antibiotics used are tetracycline, doxycycline, and
minocycline. Chloramphenicol is usually reserved for pregnant bitches or young puppies.
Fluoroquinolones, such as enrofloxacin, have shown efficacy, but their use is generally
restricted to older animals. Side effects to any of the antibiotics may be seen. Your
veterinarian will choose the antibiotic that best suits your pet's age, pregnancy status, etc.
Blood transfusions to treat anemia and other supportive therapies may be needed.
Prognosis
Prognosis is excellent in dogs that are diagnosed and treated early and who have no
complications. Lifelong immunity often occurs after the infection is cleared.
More severely affected patients are at higher risk for complications, such as kidney
disease, neurological disease, vasculitis, and coagulopathies. Prognosis is guarded for
patients that have complications.
Prevention
Limit your dog's exposure to ticks and tick-infested areas.
Inspect your dog closely for ticks. The sooner you can remove a tick after it attaches, the
better the chance that the organism will not have had time to become infective. Wear
gloves when removing ticks, as the infective organism can get into your body through
abrasions, cuts, etc. You can also use a tick remover tool.
Use tick control products to prevent ticks from attaching or to kill ones that are already
attached.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6370902&pid=19239
54a0fbef-6e75-4f42-b8a1-140a4611e3ec.1754287131
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6370902&ind=365&objTypeID=1007 2/3

8/4/25, 11:28 AM Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=6370902&ind=365&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Extremely affected dogs show rigidity in every
muscle, even the ears. Classically there is a
history of a wound in a tetanus case (generally in
the preceding 1-2 weeks) but sometimes the
wound has gone unnoticed by the owner and this
important clue is not available. Graphic by
MarVistaVet
Tetanus in Pets (Lock Jaw)
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 19, 2023
Published: April 01, 2007
We have all heard of tetanus shots and have some
sense that we are supposed to periodically get
them, especially after exposure to some sort of
dirty wound or bite. Some of us may even know
that tetanus is sometimes referred to as lock jaw,
but the general knowledge of tetanus generally
does not extend much beyond that. Unless you
work with livestock, you may not realize that
tetanus is a concern for animals as well as for
people. Tetanus is a disease caused by a toxin
secreted by a bacterium known as Clostridium
tetani, one of many toxin-secreting Clostridia.
These bacteria are anaerobic, meaning that they
grow in conditions where there is no oxygen (such
as a deep bite wound or puncture). Clostridia are
soil bacteria, meaning that they live in dirt so it
should be easy to see how a puncture
contaminated with dirt would be a classical
tetanus-yielding wound. Such wounds are
particularly common on farms where there might
be nails or bits of wire on the ground, ready to
pierce a human or animal foot, but there is
nothing special about rusted metal in predisposing to tetanus. The puncture can come
from any pointed object. The pointy object provides the puncture (an anaerobic wound)
and contamination with dirt provides the Clostridia. A fight involving a bite wound and
rolling around in dirt might similarly offer an opportunity for tetanus.
Different animal species have different sensitivity to the tetanus toxin. Horses, humans,
and livestock are more sensitive while cats are quite resistant and almost never get
infected. We will be confining our discussion primarily to dogs.
The Course of the Disease
The tetanus toxin is called tetanospasmin. It is produced by the bacterium Clostridium
tetani in a wound. The toxin binds to local nerves and migrates up into the central nervous
system where it interferes with the release of glycine and GABA, both of which are
inhibitory neurotransmitters. The result of this loss of inhibition is painful muscle overactivity, spasms and rigidity. In severe cases, the patient cannot breathe because of the
rigid paralysis of the respiratory muscles and a mechanical ventilator is required. As a
human disease, tetanus has been known and described since ancient times. In the
modern world, human death is unusual and is mostly limited to infants and to the elderly,
but even in these groups mortality is only 10-15 percent.

8/4/25, 11:29 AM Tetanus in Pets (Lock Jaw) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952625&ind=370&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Cultured Clostridium tetani spores. Photo by CDC
The incubation period of tetanus is 3 to 21
days, with 5 to 10 days from the original
wound being more typical. Classically, the
patient first loses the ability to blink and must
flash the third eyelid to moisten the eye. The
patient becomes sensitive to light and sound
such that clapping one’s hands can actually
create spasms or seizures. Dogs with ears
that hang down may actually develop ears
that stand up straight, and the facial muscles
pull back in such a way as to create what is
called the risus sardonicus or sardonic smile.
In more advanced stages, the patient can no
longer walk and stands stiffly in what is
called a sawhorse stance. In an advanced
state of disease, the patient cannot walk or
even sit up and is at risk for aspiration of
saliva or food contents. If the jaws are
locked, feeding may be impossible and if the
respiratory muscles become involved, the patient will not be able to effectively breathe.
In dogs, a localized tetanus is more common than the generalized (whole body form) and
only the limb nearest the original wound becomes rigid or will tremor. This is an easier
form to treat compared to the more generalized; however, the localized form can spread
and become the generalized form.
In the generalized form, initial signs seem to pertain to the eyes and can easily be
mistaken for eye disease in the early stages.
Testing
There is no test for tetanus in the way you might hope: no blood test or unique finding.
The diagnosis is generally made based on the appearance of the animal and history of a
wound. It is possible to measure antibody levels against the tetanus toxin but this has not
been widely used in the clinical setting. Attempting to culture Clostridium tetani from the
wound is generally not successful.
Therapy
The first step in treatment is antibiotics to kill the Clostridia. Happily, unusual antibiotics
are not needed: penicillin works quite well for this classical gram positive rod.
Clindamycin and metronidazole are also felt to be effective. Improvement is usually
obvious in the first week of treatment.
Sedation is necessary to control the spasms and/or seizures. Acepromazine and
chlorpromazine have been recommended to control the sensitivity to light and noise. The
patient will need a darkened quiet room and may need his eyes covered to reduce
stimulation. These medications can promote seizures in other sets of circumstances, but
tetanus is the exception. Injectable pentobarbital, phenobarbital, propofol, methocarbamol,
diazepam, or midazolam can be used to control the muscles stiffness.
Patients for whom respiratory compromise is a concern (when the respiratory muscles are
affected or if there is larynx spasm) may actually need days of general anesthesia, an
endotracheal tube (tube in the windpipe to keep an airway open) or even a mechanical
ventilator.
The decision on whether or not to include tetanus antitoxin is more controversial. Antitoxin
is an antibody solution (a blood product) generated by either a horse or human to bind
and destroy the tetanus toxin. It cannot remove toxin already bound to the patient’s nerves
but can inactivate new toxin not yet bound. Toxin that is already bound to nerves simply

8/4/25, 11:29 AM Tetanus in Pets (Lock Jaw) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952625&ind=370&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Photo courtesy of Dr. Wendy Brooks
has to unbind in time on its own. There is a risk in using antitoxin because it is a blood
product of another species and highly inflammatory to the immune system. Antitoxin can
be given under the skin or in the muscle but can take up to 3 days to reach a therapeutic
level this way. Giving it by IV is more rapid but also more dangerous in terms of inducing
an anaphylactic reaction. Skin testing is commonly used to see how reactive the patient
might be. It is potentially helpful in early stages of disease only.
Tetanus toxoid is the tetanus shot most of us have had at one time or another. It is a
vaccine against the tetanus toxin and it is part of a horse’s regular vaccination set, just as
it is part of a human’s vaccination set. Because dogs and cats are much more resistant to
tetanus than horses and humans, regular vaccination against tetanus is not recommended
for them.
Nursing care requires a darkened room with minimal stimulation even if the pet no longer
requires hospitalization. Clenched jaws can be problematic for feeding so expect a liquid
diet or slurry to be needed. Soft bedding to prevent bedsores is a must.
Improvement is generally noted within the first week of therapy but complete recovery can
easily take a month.
Some Tetanus Statistics
Most of the information in this article has been gleaned from a study by Burkitt et al
published in the Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association in January 2007
where 35 cases of canine tetanus seen at the University of California Veterinary Teaching
hospital were reviewed for analysis.
Severity Classes
For the purposes of the study mentioned above, cases were classified by the severity of
their signs into four groups. It is important to realize that a dog’s initial classification could
easily change (in this study 17 dogs that were normal or in Group I at the beginning of the
study ended in Group III or IV).
Group I The dog was able to walk but also demonstrated constricted pupils,
risus sardonicus, erect ears, inability to open its jaws, sunken eyes,
and/or sensitivity to light.
Group II All of the above plus erect tail, sawhorse stance, difficulty swallowing,
walking stiffly with difficulty.
Group III All of the above plus muscle tremors or spasms, inability to walk, and
seizures.
Group IV All of the above plus any of the following: heart rate below 60 beats
per minute, heart rate above 140 beats per minute, high blood
pressure, low blood pressure, or respiratory arrest.
Study Results
Overall, of the 35 dogs included in the UC Davis study, 77
percent survived. All of the dogs that did not progress
beyond the severity of Group II survived and 50% of the
dogs in Groups III and IV survived. Dogs in these latter two
groups required continuous care (intravenous fluids,
sedation, nutritional support, etc.)
In 27 percent of cases, the initial wound was a foxtail tract
and an additional 50 percent of wounds were suspicious of
foxtail tract. A foxtail, or grass awn, is a sharp plant tuft that
easily gets caught in fur and migrates deep into a wound,

8/4/25, 11:29 AM Tetanus in Pets (Lock Jaw) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952625&ind=370&objTypeID=1007 3/4
ending up in an assortment of inopportune areas of the body. An important conclusion of
this study was that the wound need not be a bite or traumatic puncture.
Recovery of an Extreme Case
This video shows an extreme case of tentanus. University of Florida veterinarians saved
the dog.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952625&pid=19239
ba091e9b-b20c-4868-9e3f-1c94c3a6ad9a.1754287160
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:29 AM Tetanus in Pets (Lock Jaw) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=4952625&ind=370&objTypeID=1007 4/4

An American Dog Tick, or Dermacentor variabilis.
Photo by CDC.
Tick Paralysis in Pets
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: August 11, 2023
Published: July 05, 2016
What is Tick Paralysis?
Tick paralysis (also known as tick bite
paralysis, or tick toxicosis) is caused by
neurotoxins secreted in saliva by certain
species of female ticks. Neurotoxins are
chemicals that damage nerve cells and can
cause a wide array of symptoms, including
paralysis (the loss of mobility and movement),
due to nerve toxins in tick saliva. There are
differences in ticks all over the world, and the
health impacts they may have. In this article,
we concentrate on tick paralysis information
for species found in North America, Europe,
and Australia.
Regional and Tick Species Differences
In North America, Dermacentor and Ixodes spp. are primarily involved. Tick paralysis
exclusively affects dogs in North America. The disease has not been reported in domestic
cats. In Australia, Ixodes holocyclus, Ixodes cornuatus, and Ixodex hirsti are primarily
involved in dog and cat cases. Female adults of I. holocyclus are mainly responsible for
tick paralysis in the eastern coastal region of Australia, although larvae or nymphs can
trigger neurotoxicosis if they are present in large numbers. I. cornuatus is responsible for
the disease mainly in south-eastern Australia and Tasmania.
In Europe, Rhipicephalus sanguineus is responsible for most canine cases. Feline cases
have not been reported in Europe.
Clinical Signs of Tick Paralysis in North America
Not all ticks produce the toxin and not all tick-infested animals develop paralysis.
Signs usually occur five to nine days after tick attachment, and include:
Rapidly ascending, lower motor (movement) weakness. (The motor nerve
problems start with the rear limbs and move forward to involve the front limbs.)
Signs tend to start with weakness in the hind limbs, followed by weakness in
the front limbs and paralysis of all four legs.
Occasionally, nerves of the head may be affected, resulting in facial weakness,
voice changes, swallowing problems, or decreased muscle tone in the jaw.
In severely affected patients, the respiratory muscles may become paralyzed.
Signs tend to be symmetrical ( equal on both sides of the body).
Pain sensation remains intact.

8/4/25, 11:33 AM Tick Paralysis in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=7417476&ind=371&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Clinical Signs of Tick Paralysis In Europe
Signs of tick paralysis are similar to that of North American cases, and animals have
symmetrical signs.
Clinical Signs of Tick Paralysis In Australia
Because the species of ticks are different, in Australia the neurologic signs observed in
pets are more severe and rapidly progressive in affected animals. Both dogs and cats
can be affected, and paralysis of all legs can develop within hours.
Other signs include:
Drooling, megaesophagus (where the esophagus or food tube from the mouth
to the stomach becomes enlarged and loses the ability to move food), and
regurgitation.
Animals’ pupils are often dilated and poorly responsive to light.
The urinary bladder may be distended, causing urination problems.
Rapid, abnormal heart rates and high blood pressure are possible.
Fluid collection in the lungs and breathing issues can also occur, which leads to
not getting enough oxygen.
Neurological problems affecting specific areas – typically on one side of the
body rather than both (i.e., asymmetrical) – are found consistently in a
proportion of dogs and cats with tick paralysis from I. holocylcus.
In one study, asymmetrical signs were observed in 8% of dogs with I. holocyclus tick
paralysis. In the asymmetrical cases, tick(s) were present on the same side as the
neurologic problems. Paralysis of the respiratory muscles is more common than in North
America and death can occur within one to two days if treatment is ineffective or
inadequate.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, finding a tick on the body of the patient, and rapid
resolution of clinical signs after removal of the tick. (Either manual removal or treatment
with a quick-kill, anti-tick product.)
Diseases that can be confused with tick paralysis and that will need to be ruled out by
your veterinarian are acute polyradiculoneuritis (a disease that causes paralysis and
sometimes facial and vocal weakness), botulism (another motor paralysis condition
caused by eating the toxic bacteria Clostridium botulinum), and myasthenia gravis (a crisis
form of this disease, which means rapid onset of full body weakness, respiratory failure,
and megaesophagus).
Specific Therapies
Tick Removal
When tick paralysis is suspected, your veterinarian will examine your pet thoroughly for
ticks. This may include whole-body clipping for long-haired dogs. All areas of the body will
be checked, and all ticks found will be removed. Removal is the primary means of
treatment.
Your veterinarian may apply a medication to kill parasites (a parasiticide) on the skin/fur.
However, it can take the parasiticide up to 48-72 hours to kill any remaining ticks present
on your pet, and some may be younger, smaller, and difficult to see. Because it is
sometimes difficult to remove all ticks in this situation, clinical signs may progress during
this time.

8/4/25, 11:33 AM Tick Paralysis in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=7417476&ind=371&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Ticks can range in size, and it is important to
check the whole body thoroughly.
For tick paralysis in North America and Europe,
removal/death of tick(s) and supportive care are
frequently all that is required, because clinical signs
improve rapidly after the tick stops feeding. In
Australia, tick removal may work if clinical signs
have not yet developed. If signs have already
started, more treatment of the signs and/or
antiserum will be required to control the toxicosis.
Tick Antiserum
Immunity to tick neurotoxins after being exposed in
the past, or natural immunity. has been described in
dogs that have survived tick paralysis; however,
natural immunity doesn’t last long, and the animal
can develop tick paralysis again after another tick
bite.
In Australia, tick antiserum (TAS, tick antivenom, tick antitoxin) from hyperimmune dogs
may help in the treatment of tick paralysis. Controlled clinical studies are lacking, but there
is strong evidence from users of TAS that commercially available TAS is beneficial when
dealing with the Australian toxin. However, administration of TAS carries the risk of drug
reactions, so your veterinarian will weigh the positives and negatives of the use of this
antiserum.
Supportive Care
Supportive care is extremely important for paralyzed patients. Such care may include
intravenous fluid therapy, physiotherapy, urinary bladder management, and hand feeding
with the animal in a sternal (laying on the belly) or vertical position (sitting on the bottom,
sometimes in a specialized chair) for dogs that have developed megaesophagus. In
addition, a feeding tube may be considered. If there is lung damage, antibiotics may be
necessary. If there are eye problems, eye lubricants may be needed.
Respiratory failure is a major complication of tick paralysis, especially from I. holocyclus,
so oxygen supplementation and mechanical ventilation, where a tube is placed into the
lungs and attached to a ventilation machine to assist with breathing, may be required.
Prognosis
In North America, the prognosis for tick paralysis due to Deramacenter
variabilis or Deramacenter Andersonii is good, provided all ticks on the patient are
removed or killed and adequate nursing care is provided. Removing the tick(s) results in
an improvement in signs within hours. Complete recovery usually occurs within one to
three days. Occasionally, muscle weakness may persist for weeks, but most patients fully
recover from this disease when treated appropriately. Death can occur in untreated dogs
from paralysis of the respiratory muscles.
In Australia, the prognosis for tick paralysis due to Ixodes holcylus is guarded and
recovery may be prolonged. In Australia, tick removal may suffice if clinical signs have not
yet developed. Otherwise, the clinical signs will progress if appropriate medical treatment
is not done. Dogs less than six months of age and small breed dogs are at significantly
higher risk of death. Dogs with low oxygen levels have a better chance of survival if they
receive mechanical ventilation than if they do not. Occasional cases of sudden death have
been reported within a few weeks of recovery. Therefore, your veterinarian will
recommend that your pet have a non-stressful, 2-week resting period after recovery.
Preventing Tick Paralysis

8/4/25, 11:33 AM Tick Paralysis in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=7417476&ind=371&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The best way to prevent tick paralysis is to use tick control products. Check pets daily and
remove any ticks. Always see your veterinarian right away if you notice any concerning
signs after a tick bite.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=7417476&pid=19239
ba091e9b-b20c-4868-9e3f-1c94c3a6ad9a.1754287188
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:33 AM Tick Paralysis in Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254096&id=7417476&ind=371&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 03, 2023
Published: August 06, 2007
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not
anyone’s friend. The same phosphorus
that has so many helpful roles in the body
(from transferring biochemical energy to
combining with calcium to form bone),
turns against us in a condition called
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
The short version is that the failing kidney
is no longer good at getting rid of excess
phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the
blood begin to rise. The rise in
phosphorus upsets the delicate balance
between calcium and phosphorus and
activates a regulatory hormonal cascade
that attempts to re-establish control.
Without healthy kidney tissue to play its
role in this balance, the body is fighting a
losing battle. Calcium is mobilized from bone to balance the phosphorus but in the end
this only serves to demineralize and weaken the bones and cause calcium phosphate
deposits to form in soft tissues. These mineral deposits are inflammatory and damaging.
The hormones that play roles in the regulation of calcium and phosphorus are parathyroid
hormone and calcitriol (which most of us know as Vitamin D). The story co-stars a
substance called Fibroblast Growth Factor 23. These three materials interact to maintain a
normal and effective blood calcium level without allowing phosphorus levels to run away.
We'll review the story of how this works.
Keeping Calcium Under Control
While our discussion of renal disease largely revolves around phosphorus, the importance
of calcium cannot be underestimated. The movement of calcium ions is what allows our
muscle fibers to contract, not just in our arms and legs but also in our hearts, and
involuntary intestinal and blood vessel muscles as well. Calcium combined with
phosphorus makes up bone; in fact, bone can be considered a storage depot for calcium
when we need some in a pinch. The blood level of calcium is tightly regulated by
hormones within a narrow range as too much calcium is as dangerous as too little.
There are four tiny parathyroid glands around the thyroid gland in the throat area. These
glands produce a biochemical called parathyroid hormone (often abbreviated PTH). PTH
basically raises calcium and activates vitamin D, which further raises calcium. It sounds
like calcium would just continue to rise out of control but there is a safeguard. When active

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 1/4
The four parathyroid glands are shown as black dots.
Illustration by MarVistaVet
vitamin D levels get to a certain point, they
shut off PTH production. Calcium levels then
drop down and between these two
hormones, blood calcium is regulated within
a healthy range.
Keeping Phosphorus Under Control
When it comes to phosphorus, PTH and
calcitriol no longer work together. PTH
signals the kidney to dump phosphorus while
calcitriol signals the kidney to save it. In the
normal body, the coordination of these
hormones works out to keep calcium and
phosphorus levels in balance, no matter
what is happening with the blood calcium.
All this goes along swimmingly until the
kidney is too damaged to respond to its
hormonal signals or properly activate
calcitriol.
Parathyroid hormone causes the kidney
to dump phosphorus while vitamin D
causes the kidney to save phosphorus.
What Happens in Kidney Failure?
In early kidney failure, the kidney becomes unable to get rid of phosphorus normally, and
as a result phosphorus levels begin to rise. This activates a substance called Fibroblast
Growth Factor 23 (affectionately known as FGF-23) from the bones. FGF-23 encourages
the kidney to dump more phosphorus and dampen the activation of vitamin D (remember
that vitamin D tells the kidney to save phosphorus). As part of its mission to dampen
vitamin D, FGF-23 also instructs the parathyroid glands to cut back on PTH. All this
vitamin D suppression is all well and good and helps keep the phosphorus levels
reasonable, but pretty soon FGF-23 has dampened both PTH and vitamin D so well that
calcium levels begin to drop.
And this is where calcium-phosphorus Hell breaks loose.
At this point, kidney failure is no longer early. Dropping calcium levels supersede any
FGF-23-mediated suppression of PTH and the parathyroid glands crank up PTH
production to bring calcium levels back up. To meet the body's demand for circulating
calcium, the bones liberate their structural calcium to save the day, but unfortunately doing
this also liberates more phosphorus. This leads to an even higher phosphorus level.
Circulating phosphorus binds the circulating calcium creating crystals that deposit in the
body's soft tissues and generate inflammation. Bones are weakened and replaced with
fibrous tissue. Calcium is depositing uselessly all over the place and the parathyroid
glands must crank even harder to keep calcium levels livable. A metabolic disaster has
occurred at this point.
Making matters worse are other effects of excess parathyroid levels. In high amounts,
nerves cannot conduct electrical impulses properly. Patients become dazed and poorly
responsive.
The goal is to keep the phosphorus level from getting out of control in the first
place. If this is not possible, the goal is to get the phosphorus level back under
control and keep it there.

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Drip set for IV fluid. Photo by MarVistaVet
Treatment
How do we Control Phosphorus Levels?
The goal phosphorus level defined by the International Renal Interest Society is between
2.5 and 4.6 mg/dl for earlier renal insufficiency stages and to keep phosphorus levels
under 6 mg/dl for Stage Four (more advanced) patients.
Fluid Therapy
Often simply giving fluids under the skin at
home provides enough extra circulation through
the kidneys for the extra phosphorus to be
excreted normally. Further treatment may not be
needed. Hydrating a damaged kidney effectively
maximizes the kidney's remaining function, and
this may be enough to control phosphorus.
Therapeutic Diet
It is important to remember that ultimately
phosphorus balance is a matter of balancing
phosphorus entering the body with phosphorus
leaving the body. If the kidney is no longer
effective at removing phosphorus, we can
perhaps work on limiting the amount of
phosphorus entering the body. The first step in
doing this is with a therapeutic renal diet. These diets are designed to give the kidney less
work to do, and that includes limiting phosphorus entering the GI tract. After one to two
months on a phosphorus-restricted diet, blood tests will indicate whether or not additional
phosphorus treatment is needed.
Phosphate Binders
These products are given with food to bind phosphorus in the food. The complex of
phosphorus and phosphate binder cannot be absorbed into the body with the result being
reduction of incoming phosphorus. If the pet will not eat food containing the binder, the
binder can be given just before or just after the meal but the binder must be in the GI tract
at the same time as the food or it will not work. There is no point in giving a binder to an
animal that is not eating. Giving the binder before the meal can induce enough stress so
that the pet will not eat so it is better to give the binder after the meal if the binder is not
accepted mixed in the food.
There are a number of phosphate binders available and which one is selected will depend
in part on the concurrent calcium situation. This means that the ionized calcium level (not
the total calcium level) must be measured. Some binders also supplement calcium while
others drop or have no influence on calcium. Some patients require more than one binder
to get their phosphorus value low enough.
Calcitriol
You might think that calcitriol would not be helpful in this situation since it leads the kidney
to retain phosphorus. The good news is that when small enough doses are given, calcitriol
can still act as the off switch for parathyroid hormone without causing the kidney to retain
phosphorus. The amounts needed for this beneficial effect are so small (they are
measured in nanograms) that a compounding pharmacy is needed to custom-make the
product at the proper dose.
Calcitriol cannot be used in patients with elevated blood calcium levels.

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Calcitriol cannot be used in patients with phosphorus levels that are already
abnormal. This is a preventive measure more than a treatment.
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and its associated high blood phosphate levels are
one of the most common uremic toxin issues in treating kidney disease. Dedication is
required to get phosphate binders into the pet along with food when the pet’s appetite is
weak. Phosphate binders come in powders, liquids, capsules, compounded flavored
chews, and other formats. Consider what approach is likely to work best for your pet but,
remember, the binder only works with food.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952674&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287460
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 4/4








