Canine Distemper ByKate E. Creevy, DVM, MS, DACVIM-SAIM, College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A & M University; Jeremy B. Evans, DVM, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2022 | Modified Jun 2025 Canine distemper is a highly infectious, systemic, viral disease of dogs that occurs worldwide. Dogs commonly exhibit systemic clinical signs (fever, lethargy, loss of appetite), respiratory signs (nasal discharge, pneumonia), and GI signs (diarrhea), variably followed by neurologic signs (muscle twitching, focal or generalized seizures), which may be delayed. Vaccination is available and is generally effective. Diagnosis is made by recognition of the clinical signs, along with confirmation through antibody assays or reverse transcriptase PCR. Treatment is generally supportive, and the prognosis varies with the severity of the neurologic signs. Etiology and Pathogenesis | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Prevention | Key Points | For More Information  Clinically, canine distemper is characterized by:  a diphasic fever  respiratory discharge and pneumonia  diarrhea and inappetence  frequently, neurologic complications  The epidemiology of canine distemper is complicated by the large number of species susceptible to infection. The disease occurs in Canidae (dogs, foxes, wolves, raccoon dogs), Mustelidae (ferrets, mink, skunks, wolverines, martens, badgers, otters), most Procyonidae (raccoons, coatimundis), some Viveridae (binturongs, palm civets), Ailuridae (red pandas), Ursidae (bears), Elephantidae (Asian elephants), primates (Japanese monkeys), and large Felidae (cats). Domestic dogs (including feral populations) are considered to be the reservoir species in most, if not all, locations. Antigenic drift and strain diversity is increasingly documented in association with outbreaks in wild species, domestic dogs, and exotic animals held in zoos and parks.  Etiology and Pathogenesis of Canine Distemper Canine distemper virus is a paramyxovirus closely related to the viruses of measles and rinderpest. The fragile, enveloped, single-stranded RNA virus is relatively unstable outside the host. Infection is transmitted mainly via aerosol droplet secretions from infected animals. Some infected dogs may shed virus particles for several months.  The virus initially replicates in the lymphatic tissue of the respiratory tract. A cell-associated viremia results in infection of all lymphatic tissues, which is followed by infection of respiratory, GI, and urogenital epithelium, as well as the CNS and optic nerves. Disease follows virus replication in these tissues. The extent of viremia and of virus transmission to various tissues is moderated by the extent of specific humoral immunity in the host during the viremic period.  Clinical Findings of Canine Distemper A transient fever usually occurs 3–6 days after infection with canine distemper virus, and there may be leukopenia (characterized by lymphopenia) at this time; these clinical signs may go unnoticed or may be accompanied by anorexia. The fever subsides for several days before a second fever occurs, which may be accompanied by serous nasal discharge, mucopurulent ocular discharge, lethargy, and anorexia. GI and respiratory signs, typically complicated by secondary bacterial infections, may follow; rarely, pustular dermatitis may be observed. Encephalomyelitis may occur in association with these signs, follow the systemic disease, or occur in the absence of systemic signs. Dogs surviving the acute phase may have hyperkeratosis of the footpads and epithelium of the nasal planum, as well as enamel hypoplasia in incompletely erupted teeth.  Overall, a longer course of illness is associated with the presence of neurologic signs; however, there is no way to anticipate whether an infected dog will develop neurologic manifestations.  Typical neurologic signs include:  localized involuntary muscle twitching (myoclonus, chorea, flexor spasm, hyperkinesia)  seizures, including salivation and chewing movements of the jaw (chewing-gum fits)  Other neurologic signs include:  circling  head tilt  nystagmus  paresis to paralysis  seizures ranging in type from focal to generalized  Emerging viral strains may be associated with greater neurotropism. Increased morbidity and mortality from neurologic complications has been observed.1  A dog may exhibit any or all of these multisystemic clinical signs during the course of the disease. Infection may be mild and inapparent or lead to severe disease with most of the described clinical signs. The course of the systemic disease may be as short as 10 days; however, the onset of neurologic signs may be delayed several weeks or months as a result of chronic progressive demyelination within the CNS.  Clinicopathologic findings are nonspecific and include lymphopenia, with the possible finding of viral inclusion bodies in circulating leukocytes very early in the course of the disease. Thoracic radiographs may reveal an interstitial pattern typical of viral pneumonia.  Chronic distemper encephalitis (old dog encephalitis, or ODE), a condition often marked by ataxia, compulsive movements such as head pressing or continual pacing, and incoordinated hypermetria, may be observed in fully vaccinated adult dogs without a history suggestive of systemic canine distemper infection. Although canine distemper antigen has been detected in the brains of some dogs with ODE by fluorescent antibody staining or genetic methods, dogs with ODE are not infectious, and replication-competent virus has not been isolated. The disease is due to an inflammatory reaction associated with persistent canine distemper virus infection in the CNS; however, the mechanisms that trigger this syndrome are unknown.  Lesions Thymic atrophy is a consistent postmortem finding in young puppies infected with canine distemper virus. Hyperkeratosis of the nose and footpads is often found in dogs with neurologic signs. Depending on the extent of secondary bacterial infection, bronchopneumonia, enteritis, and skin pustules also may be present. In cases of acute to peracute death, exclusively respiratory abnormalities may be found. Histologically, canine distemper virus produces necrosis of lymphatic tissues, interstitial pneumonia, and cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusion bodies in respiratory, urinary, and GI epithelium.  Lesions found in the brains of dogs with neurologic complications include:  neuronal degeneration  gliosis  noninflammatory demyelination  perivascular cuffing  nonsuppurative leptomeningitis  intranuclear inclusion bodies, predominantly within glial cells  References Origgi FC, Plattet P, Sattler U, et al. Emergence of canine distemper virus strains with modified molecular signature and enhanced neuronal tropism leading to high mortality in wild carnivores. Vet Pathol. 2012;49(6):913–929.  Diagnosis of Canine Distemper Preliminary diagnosis: clinical evaluation  Confirmation: reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) and antibody detection tests  Canine distemper should be considered in the diagnosis of any febrile condition in dogs with multisystemic clinical signs involving the respiratory, GI, and/or neurologic systems. Unvaccinated dogs, or dogs of unknown vaccination status, should be particularly suspected. An appropriate index of suspicion based on clinical signs is a necessary first step. Widely available RT-PCR and antibody detection tests (ELISA, immunofluorescence assay [IFA]) are used to confirm the presence of virus or an immune response against it in appropriately selected clinical cases.  Clinical signs in the respiratory and GI systems may be modified by, or confused with, concurrent parasitism and numerous viral or bacterial infections. Characteristic neurologic signs sometimes do not appear until late in the disease.  Distemper in dogs can be confused with other systemic infections, such as:  parvovirus infection  infectious canine tracheobronchitis  infectious canine hepatitis  Intoxicants such as lead or organophosphates can cause simultaneous GI and neurologic signs.  In dogs with multisystemic clinical signs, IFA or RT-PCR can be used to examine:  smears of conjunctival, tracheal, nasal, vaginal, or other epithelium  the buffy coat of the blood  transtracheal wash fluid  urine  bone marrow aspirates  Commercially available RT-PCR may not distinguish natural infection from vaccine-derived virus; however, quantitative RT-PCR may overcome this limitation. Antibody titers or ELISA can be performed on CSF and compared with peripheral blood; a relatively higher number of antibodies in the CSF is typical of natural infection versus vaccination. Viral antigen IFA or fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) for viral DNA can be performed on biopsies from the footpads or from the haired skin of the dorsal neck.  At necropsy, diagnosis is usually confirmed by histologic evaluation of lesions, IFA, FISH, or a combination of these. Tissue IFA often is negative when the dog is showing only neurologic signs or when circulating antibody is present (or both), requiring that the diagnosis be made by CSF evaluation or RT-PCR analysis.  Treatment of Canine Distemper Supportive care  As with most diseases due to viruses, supportive care is the mainstay of treatment for canine distemper. Patients require nutrition and hydration support, defense against secondary bacterial infections, protection against the consequences of seizures, and excellent nursing care to optimize the chances of a successful immune response to the virus.  Treatment includes:  administration of prophylactic broad-spectrum antimicrobials  provision of balanced electrolyte solutions  provision of parenteral nutrition  administration of antipyretics, analgesics, and anticonvulsants  excellent nursing care  No single treatment of canine distemper is specific or uniformly successful. Experimental in vitro work with antiviral agents shows promise; however, these agents have not yet been widely used. The use of porcine-derived anti-canine-distemper-virus antibodies has shown promise: naturally infected puppies that were administered xenogeneic antibodies as an adjunct to standard supportive care had an increased rate of survival compared to puppies that received only supportive care.1 In addition, for further supportive care, one case report described the use of intramuscular injections of botulinum toxin in one dog to alleviate severe and debilitating myoclonus associated with infection.2  Unfortunately, treatment for acute neurologic manifestations of distemper is frequently unsuccessful. If the neurologic signs are progressive or severe, the owner should be appropriately advised. With prompt, aggressive care, dogs may recover completely from multisystemic clinical signs; in other cases, however, neurologic signs may persist after GI and respiratory signs have resolved. Some dogs with chronic progressive forms of neurologic disease may respond to glucocorticoid therapy.  References Liu PC, Chen CA, Chen CM, et al. Application of xenogeneic anti-canine distemper virus antibodies in treatment of canine distemper puppies. J Small Anim Pract. 2016 Nov;57(11):626–630. doi: 10.1111/jsap.12557. Epub 2016 Oct 11. PMID: 27726133.  Schubert T, Clemmons R, Miles S, Draper W. The use of botulinum toxin for the treatment of generalized myoclonus in a dog. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc. 2013 Mar-Apr;49(2):122–127. doi: 10.5326/JAAHA-MS-5786. Epub 2013 Jan 16. PMID: 23325599.  Prevention of Canine Distemper With the potential increasing virulence of emerging strains and the wide host range of canine distemper virus, widespread vaccination of domestic dogs is essential. Successful immunization of pups with canine distemper modified live virus (MLV) vaccines depends on the lack of interference by maternal antibodies. To overcome this barrier, pups are vaccinated with MLV vaccine when 6 weeks old and at 3- to 4-week intervals until 16 weeks old. Alternatively, measles virus vaccine induces immunity to canine distemper virus in the presence of relatively greater amounts of maternal distemper antibodies. MLV measles vaccine is administered intramuscularly to pups 6–7 weeks old and is followed with at least two more doses of MLV distemper vaccine at 12–16 weeks old.  Many varieties of attenuated distemper vaccine, as well as recombinant vaccine, are available and should be administered according to manufacturers’ directions. MLV vaccines should not be administered in late-pregnancy or early-lactation bitches. MLV vaccines can produce postvaccinal illness in some immunosuppressed dogs. A recombinant canarypox vector vaccine expressing distemper virus proteins is licensed for use in ferrets; the American Association of Zoo Veterinarians recommends extra-label use of this vaccine in many at-risk species held in zoos and parks.  Historically, annual revaccination has been standard because of the breaks in protection that can occur in stressed, diseased, or immunosuppressed dogs, and because vaccines have been labeled for annual administration. Substantial evidence supports the finding that immunity induced by MLV distemper vaccines lasts ≥ 3 years. In many cases, however, a vaccination frequency of less than annual remains an extra-label administration of the vaccine; thus, decisions to revaccinate less often than annually should be considered in light of local prevalence of the disease and other potential risk factors, as well as industry and professional-organization recommendations.  Canine distemper virus is sensitive to lipid solvents such as ether, as well as most disinfectants, including phenols and quaternary ammonium compounds; these substances should be part of the cleaning and disinfection protocols at kennels and veterinary premises.  Key Points Canine distemper is a highly infectious, multisystemic viral infection of dogs, with variable neurologic outcomes.  Diagnosis depends on recognition of the characteristic clinical signs in an at-risk dog, followed by specific detection of the virus itself, or an immune response against it.  Treatment is primarily supportive. The patient's own immune response is necessary to resolve the infection. Among survivors, full recovery from respiratory and GI signs is expected; however, the neurologic prognosis is unpredictable. Leptospirosis in Dogs ByKatharine F. Lunn, BVMS, PhD, DACVIM-SAIM, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University; Thomas J. Divers, DVM, DACVIM, DACVECC, Department of Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Cornell University;Walter Lilenbaum, PhD, Universidade Federal Fluminense, Brazil;Peter R. Davies, BVSc, PhD, University of Minnesota Reviewed/Revised Feb 2022 | Modified Apr 2025 Dogs are susceptible to infection by many leptospiral serovars, with clinical signs of leptospirosis ranging from mild, subclinical infection to acute kidney injury, , respiratory disease, or death. Diagnosis includes serologic testing and identification of leptospires in tissues, blood, or urine. Doxycycline is the primary drug used for treatment in dogs, along with appropriate supportive care. Polyvalent vaccines are available for prevention. Specific serovars in a geographic area vary, so vaccines with the appropriate types should be used. Because it is a zoonotic disease, clinicians must remain vigilant for leptospirosis and should be aware of its different clinical presentations. Clinical Signs and Test Results | Diagnosis | Treatment | Prevention | Zoonotic Risk | Key Points | More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (4) Tables (1) Videos (0)  Leptospirosis in dogs is an infectious disease caused by bacteria in the genus Leptospira.  Dogs are the maintenance host for Leptospira interrogans serovar Canicola, and before widespread vaccination programs, serovars Canicola and Icterohaemorrhagiae were the most common serovars in dogs in the US. The prevalence of canine serovars has shifted significantly in the past few decades, and the serovars that cause disease in dogs are likely to vary with geographic region and the presence of reservoir hosts. Unfortunately, current understanding of the serovars that cause natural disease in dogs is limited by the fact that isolation of leptospires is rarely performed; thus, studies to date have relied on serologic data.  Unfortunately, the results of serologic testing (with the microscopic agglutination test [MAT]) do not reliably predict the infecting serovar in dogs (or humans) with leptospirosis; thus, the true infecting serovar is unknown in most cases. However, it is likely that the serovars that cause disease in dogs are those circulating in local wildlife.  Knowledge of the infecting serovar in dogs is essential for epidemiological studies and vaccine development; it is less important for clinicians managing individual cases.  It is currently not known whether specific serovars are associated with specific clinical signs of leptospirosis in dogs, and there is no published evidence to guide therapy based on serovar identification. It is, however, extremely important for veterinarians to maintain a high index of suspicion for leptospirosis, because this is a zoonotic disease and has a wide range of clinical presentations in dogs. Any age, breed, or sex of dog is susceptible to leptospirosis, and the diagnosis should not be excluded on the basis of signalment or lifestyle. Canine leptospirosis is not restricted to large-breed dogs, male dogs, or dogs with a predominantly outdoor lifestyle.  Clinical Signs and Test Results of Leptospirosis in Dogs Acute kidney injury has been the most common presentation for canine leptospirosis in recent years. Dogs affected by leptospirosis might show clinical signs that include lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, abdominal pain, and polyuria, oliguria, or anuria.  Serum biochemistry or serum blood gas analysis might show abnormalities such as azotemia, hyperphosphatemia, metabolic acidosis, hyponatremia, and hypo- or hyperkalemia.  Urinalysis might show abnormalities such as hyposthenuria, isosthenuria, or minimal concentration; proteinuria; glucosuria (with normal blood glucose); cylindruria; hematuria; or pyuria.  Dogs that survive acute kidney injury may return to baseline or progress to chronic kidney disease. Leptospirosis should also be considered in any dog with previously diagnosed chronic kidney disease that develops acute-on-chronic kidney injury.  Polyuria and polydipsia in the absence of azotemia is also observed in some dogs with leptospirosis, possibly as a result of nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Leptospirosis could also potentially be associated with renal tubular acidosis.  Acute liver disease can accompany acute kidney injury in dogs with leptospirosis, or it can occur alone. Clinical signs might include icterus, vomiting, anorexia, and lethargy.  Icterus, dog with leptospirosis   Image Courtesy of Dr. Katharine F. Lunn.  Serum biochemical analysis might show the following abnormalities:  Increased alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity  Increased ALT activity (usually less increased than ALP activity)  Increased bilirubin concentration  Muscle pain, stiffness, weakness, trembling, or reluctance to move can occur in dogs with leptospirosis. These signs can be the result of vasculitis, myositis, or nephritis. Myalgia is commonly reported in human leptospirosis and is associated with the septicemic phase of the disease.  Less common manifestations of canine leptospirosis include bleeding disorders, suspected to be caused by vasculitis. Clinical signs may include petechial hemorrhages, epistaxis, melena, and hematemesis. A CBC might show mild to moderate thrombocytopenia (not severe enough to cause spontaneous bleeding). Coagulation testing might show increased fibrin degradation products, prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT).  Pulmonary hemorrhage is now one of the most common clinical signs in outbreaks of human leptospirosis. This is a less common finding in canine leptospirosis; however, cough or dyspnea, or radiographic abnormalities have been noted in a number of affected dogs.  Uveitis is an uncommon manifestation of leptospirosis in dogs. It appears to be infrequently associated with experimental canine leptospirosis; however, rare case reports exist.  Additional clinical signs reported in dogs with leptospirosis include vomiting, diarrhea, weight loss, fever, hypothermia, oculonasal discharge, lymphadenopathy, effusions, and edema.  Other nonspecific CBC changes might include neutrophilia, lymphopenia, monocytosis, or mild anemia.  Thoracic radiographs might show diffuse or caudodorsal reticulonodular pulmonary opacities, likely because of pulmonary hemorrhage. Abdominal radiographs might be normal or might show renomegaly or hepatomegaly.  Thoracic radiograph, dog with leptospirosis, ventrodorsal view   Image Courtesy of Dr. Katharine F. Lunn.  Thoracic radiograph, dog with leptospirosis, left lateral view   Image Courtesy of Dr. Katharine F. Lunn.  Thoracic radiograph, dog with leptospirosis, right lateral view   Image Courtesy of Dr. Katharine F. Lunn.  Changes noted on abdominal ultrasound examination might include renomegaly, pyelectasia, increased cortical or medullary echogenicity, perinephric effusion, hyperechoic renal medullary band, hepatomegaly, hypoechoic liver, gallbladder abnormalities, or abdominal effusion or edema. These changes are not specific for leptospirosis, and absence of these findings does not exclude the diagnosis.  Gross necropsy findings can include jaundice, effusions, and petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhages on any organ, pleural, or peritoneal surface. The kidneys and liver might be enlarged, and lungs can be wet, heavy, and discolored. The liver is often friable with an accentuated lobular pattern and might have a yellowish-brown discoloration. The kidneys might have white foci on the subcapsular surface. Microscopic findings in the liver could include mild random hepatocytic necrosis, nonsuppurative hepatitis, and intrahepatic bile stasis, while swollen tubular epithelial cells, tubular necrosis, and a mixed inflammatory reaction can occur in the kidneys.  Diagnosis of Leptospirosis in Dogs Combination of the following findings: acute azotemia, cholestatic liver disease, mild to moderate thrombocytopenia, and glucosuria with normal blood glucose  Serologic testing to detect antibodies, combined with PCR assay to detect organisms  The results of all diagnostic tests should be interpreted in light of the animal's vaccination history, clinical signs, and clinicopathologic findings. The table Comparison of Tests Used to Diagnose Leptospirosis in Dogs summarizes the currently available tests and their advantages and disadvantages. A combination of acute and convalescent MAT titers and PCR assays on blood (early stages of disease) or urine (later stages of disease) is recommended.  Table Comparison of Tests Used to Diagnose Leptospirosis in Dogs Treatment of Leptospirosis in Dogs Supportive care, together with specific antimicrobial therapy  Doxycycline to eliminate both the leptospiremic and carrier phases of infection  Supportive measures for acute kidney injury and liver disease might include: fluid therapy, with electrolyte supplementation as necessary; correction of acid-base disorders; antiemetics; phosphate binders; hepatic support medications; or appetite stimulants.  Renal replacement therapy with intermittent hemodialysis or continuous renal replacement therapy should be considered for dogs that are anuric or oliguric despite appropriate supportive therapy. Antimicrobial therapy is indicated whenever leptospirosis is suspected and should be instituted before confirmatory test results are available. There are limited case reports in dogs, but no experimental studies, to guide selection of antimicrobial protocols for this species.  Current recommendations are to treat with doxycycline (5 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours, for 2 weeks). For dogs that cannot tolerate doxycycline, initial therapy with a penicillin is appropriate; however, this course of therapy should be followed by a 2-week course of doxycycline treatment to eliminate the renal carrier phase of infection. Enrofloxacin or clarithromycin might also be used to eliminate the carrier phase. Dogs recently exposed to leptospirosis can be treated prophylactically with oral administration of doxycycline for 14 days.  Prevention of Leptospirosis in Dogs Commercial bacterins for dogs are available for serovars Canicola, Icterohaemorrhagiae, Grippotyphosa, and Pomona in the US. It is not known whether vaccinated dogs are susceptible to infection with other serovars, although there is some experimental evidence for cross-protection. In general, currently available vaccines provide good protection from disease for at least one year, and also reduce renal colonization and urine shedding. Concerns exist regarding hypersensitivity reactions after leptospiral vaccination in dogs; however, vaccination against Leptospira (an organism that can cause fatal disease) is safe in most cases and studies have shown no significant increase in hypersensitivity reactions, compared with other vaccinations. Adverse reaction are perhaps associated with the use of more highly purified vaccines. Prior recommendations for vaccinating every 6 months are also no longer justified.  References Yao PJ, Stephenson N, Foley JE, et al. Incidence rates and risk factors for owner-reported adverse events following vaccination of dogs that did or did not receive a Leptospira vaccine. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 2015 Nov 15;247(10):1139–45. doi: 10.2460/javma.247.10.1139.  Zoonotic Risk of Leptospirosis in Dogs Because leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease, all veterinary personnel should take appropriate precautions when handling known or suspected infected animals. Such dogs do not need to be placed in isolation; however, they should be nursed with barrier precautions, paying particular attention to avoiding exposure of skin or mucous membranes to urine or blood. Infected dogs should be allowed to urinate in designated areas that can subsequently be cleaned and disinfected. The organisms are killed by all commonly used disinfectants. Owners of dogs recently diagnosed with canine leptospirosis should be advised of the zoonotic nature of the disease and contact their physicians with any health concerns. Owners should wear gloves when cleaning up urine and should wash their hands after handling the dog, at least until the course of antimicrobial therapy is completed.  Key Points Leptospirosis is a zoonotic disease found in multiple wild and domestic species, including dogs, and often transmitted by direct contact with urine or other body fluids of an infected host, although environmental contamination by urine can lead to transmission if conditions are suitable.  Diagnosis is by serologic testing, along with one or more methods to identify the organism in tissues or body fluids.  The treatment of choice is doxycycline, with appropriate supportive care as needed. Other antimicrobials, such as enrofloxacin, may also be effective. Vaccines can be used for prevention. Multistrain vaccines that include locally prevalent serovars should be used.  Zoonotic infections are not common; however, occupational exposure is a risk factor. The principle route of transmission is by contact with infectious body fluids. Lyme Borreliosis in Animals (Lyme Disease) ByNadine A. Vogt, BSc (Hons), DVM, MSc, University of Guelph Reviewed/Revised Mar 2021 | Modified Jun 2025 View the Pet Owner Version Lyme borreliosis is a vector-borne zoonotic disease transmitted by ticks infected with spirochetal bacteria belonging to the genus Borrelia. Affected dogs typically present with intermittent, lameness, fever, inappetance, lethargy, and focal lymphadenopathy. Although infrequently reported, clinical manifestations in horses include neurologic abnormalities, uveitis, and cutaneous lymphoma. Diagnosis is based on a combination of history, clinical signs, laboratory findings, exclusion of other diseases, and response to treatment. Treatment consists of an extended (eg, 30-day) course of antibiotics, supportive measures including analgesia, and immunosuppressive therapy in the case of autoimmune reaction. Etiology and Transmission | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Control and Prevention | Zoonotic Risk | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (2) Tables (0) Videos (1)  Lyme Disease  video Lyme borreliosis is a bacterial, tick-transmitted disease of animals (dogs, horses, possibly cats) and people. Many additional mammalian and avian species become infected but do not develop overt clinical signs. This disease is endemic to temperate areas in the northern hemisphere and is seen sporadically in Europe and Asia. Within the USA, endemic areas include the Northeast (particularly the New England states), the upper Midwest, and the Pacific coast. Globally, the incidence of Lyme borreliosis is increasing due to the expanding geographic range of tick vectors.  Diagnosis can be challenging, because most animals do not develop clinical illness after infection. Clinical signs of Lyme borreliosis have been well documented in dogs, in which the characteristic presentation includes an intermittent, shifting lameness. Horses with Lyme borreliosis may exhibit neurologic signs, uveitis, or cutaneous lymphoma. Although other clinical signs such as lameness have been reported in horses, they have yet to be conclusively linked to infection. Along with prevention, early diagnosis and treatment with antibiotics appear to be important to treatment success.  Etiology and Transmission of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals Lyme borreliosis is caused by infection with spirochetal bacteria belonging to the Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato species complex. Within this complex, the following spirochete species are well-established causes of Lyme borreliosis in people: B burgdorferi sensu stricto (North America, Europe), B mayonii (North America), B afzelii (Europe, Asia), B bavariensis (Europe, Asia), and B garinii (Europe, Asia). The predominant species responsible for Lyme borreliosis in animals is B burgdorferi sensu stricto (henceforth B burgdorferi). It is unclear whether other Borrelia species within the sensu lato complex can cause Lyme borreliosis in animals. Tick vectors of B burgdorferi sensu lato are hard-shelled Ixodes ticks. In the USA, I scapularis (colloquially known as the deer tick) is the predominant vector in the Northeast and Midwest, whereas I pacificus is the predominant vector on the Pacific coast. In Europe and Asia, I ricinus and I persulcatus are the primary vectors.  Developmental stages of Ixodes spp   Image Courtesy of Dr. Reinhard K. Straubinger.  Ticks become infected with spirochetes on having a blood meal from a Borrelia-carrying host. A variety of wildlife species act as reservoir hosts for B burgdorferi. Rodents in particular are a major reservoir for Borrelia species. Infection rates of the vectors vary according to region and season and can be as high as 50% in adult ticks. Transmission is most likely to occur during warmer months of the year, when ticks are most active. However, transmission is also possible during the winter, because ticks may be active as long as temperatures are >4°C (40°F). After tick attachment, at least 24 hours are required for the transmission of spirochetes from the infected tick into the host, and transmission usually occurs 36–48 hours into the blood meal. Early removal of attached ticks, therefore, reduces the likelihood of spirochete transmission. B burgdorferi sensu lato organisms are not transmitted by insects, bodily fluids (urine, saliva, semen), or bite wounds. Experimental studies have shown that dams infected before gestation may transmit spirochetes to their pups in utero.  Clinical Findings of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals Numerous clinical syndromes have been attributed to Lyme borreliosis in domestic animals, including limb and joint disease, as well as renal, neurologic, and cardiac abnormalities. However, the clinical syndromes seen in different animal species vary considerably. Certain clinical signs of Lyme borreliosis are well documented in horses and dogs.  Although cats can become infected with B burgdorferi and mount an antibody response, it is unknown whether they develop subsequent clinical disease.  In dogs, the most common clinical signs are intermittent, shifting lameness, fever, anorexia, lethargy, and lymphadenopathy with or without swollen, painful joints.  Additionally, a renal syndrome has been attributed to B burgdorferi infection in dogs, though a causal relationship has yet to be established. This renal syndrome is characterized by uremia, hyperphosphatemia, and severe protein-losing nephropathy, often accompanied by peripheral edema. It is thought to be immune-mediated, and dogs typically present with either acute or chronic kidney failure, with or without additional cardiac or neurologic signs (eg, blindness, hypertension, heart murmurs, thromboembolic events).  In horses, well-documented clinical signs of Lyme borreliosis include neuroborreliosis, uveitis, and cutaneous lymphoma. Horses with neuroborreliosis may exhibit any of the following clinical signs: atrophy of spinal muscles, dysphagia, laryngeal dysfunction, facial paresis, spinal cord ataxia and paresis, behavioral changes, and hyperesthesia. Horses with neuroborreliosis may also exhibit clinical signs common to other neurologic disorders (eg, meningitis, cranial nerve dysfunction). Other clinical signs in horses, such as intermittent, shifting lameness, have not been conclusively linked to Lyme borreliosis.  Most seropositive dogs and horses are asymptomatic. This stands in contrast to people, in whom infection with B burgdorferi causes illness in an estimated 90% of people. Soon after infection via a tick bite, most individuals develop a characteristic bull's-eye rash (erythema migrans) at the site of infection, and some experience flu-like symptoms. Common signs and symptoms of Lyme borreliosis in people include arthritis with severe joint pain and swelling, facial paralysis, dizziness, heart palpitations, nerve pain, and severe headaches.  Diagnosis of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals Based on a combination of history, clinical signs, laboratory data, response to therapy, and exclusion of other diseases  Serology is important, but positive results have a low positive predictive value of clinical disease  Culture and PCR do not reliably detect spirochetes  Cytology and histopathology of affected tissues may show characteristic inflammatory changes  A diagnosis of Lyme borreliosis is generally reached through the exclusion of other diseases, in tandem with a history of exposure to ticks, clinical signs, supporting laboratory data, and response to therapy. Because clinical signs are nonspecific, other diseases may mimic the signs of Lyme borreliosis. Moreover, most infected animals are asymptomatic, so a positive test result for B burgdorferi has a low positive predictive value for clinical disease. In other words, a positive test neither demonstrates that current clinical signs are caused by infection with B burgdorferi, nor suggests that the animal is likely to develop clinical illness in the future. Thus, a positive test result in a clinically ill animal may be an incidental finding.  A number of infectious agents may be transmitted by ticks (eg, Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, Babesia, Rickettsia), some of which can cause clinical signs similar to those of Lyme borreliosis. Thus, infection with these agents, or mixed infections with B burgdorferi, should be considered. Anaplasma phagocytophilum, for example, is also transmitted by Ixodes ticks and can cause clinical signs resembling those of Lyme borreliosis in dogs and horses. In addition to excluding infectious causes, orthopedic disorders (eg, trauma, immune-mediated diseases) should be excluded as well.  Autoimmune panels, CBC, serum chemistry, radiographs, and other laboratory data are generally normal, except for results pertaining directly to the affected system (eg, soft-tissue swelling in limbs, neutrophil accumulation in synovial fluids of affected joints). Serologic testing for antibodies specific for B burgdorferi sensu lato is an adjunct to clinical diagnosis. Antibodies can be detected with ELISA (which test for C6 peptide) and with multiplex fluorescence assays. Because of possible cross-reactions with other spirochetal infections, the following serologic testing methods are no longer recommended: whole cell ELISA, immunofluorescent antibody assays, and Western blot.  The standard procedure for antibody detection is a two-tiered approach in which samples are screened with a sensitive rapid assay (ELISA or multiplex fluorescence) and only positively reacting samples are rechecked with specific confirmatory tests. Although quantitative antibody assays are available to test for C6, titer magnitude is a poor predictor of current or future illness.  Some vaccines can interfere with serologic tests, in particular, those that stimulate production of OspC (outer surface protein C) antibodies. Antibodies against C6 peptide, VlsE (variable major protein-like sequence, expressed), and OspF (outer surface protein F) indicate natural exposure, because these antigens are not contained in any vaccines. False-negative serologic results may occur in the case of an acute infection (< 1 month), infection of an immune-privileged site (eg, eye), or an abnormal host response (ie, immunodeficiency). In particular, horses with neuroborreliosis are often found to be seronegative.  Isolation of B burgdorferi sensu lato by culture or detection of specific DNA by PCR from joints, skin tissue samples, or other affected tissues may also help in diagnosis. Direct detection of the organism, however, is difficult and time-consuming (up to 6 weeks for culture) and yields negative results in most cases. Blood samples are generally negative, because the organism resides in tissue and not in the circulation. Characteristic inflammatory changes seen in histologic or cytologic samples of affected tissues may also be used to support a diagnosis.  Treatment of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals A long course of antibiotics (4 weeks) is indicated to treat infection in clinically ill animals  Symptomatic therapy should be directed toward the affected organ system and toward pain management  Immunosuppressive therapy is indicated in the case of infection-related autoimmune reactions  Some animals may remain seropositive after successful treatment  Antibiotic therapy is indicated in all animals with clinical signs attributed to Lyme borreliosis. Treatment of healthy seropositive animals is problematic because of the inability to monitor response to treatment and the potential for adverse drug effects. Antimicrobials in the tetracycline and beta-lactam families have been shown to be effective in treating Lyme borreliosis in dogs and horses. A long course of antibiotics (4 weeks) is indicated. Chronic infection in dogs and horses is not well documented, so the utility or efficacy of treatment beyond 4 weeks is unknown. Symptomatic therapy directed toward the affected organ system and clinicopathologic abnormalities is also important.  In dogs, doxycycline (10 mg/kg, PO, every 12 hours) and amoxicillin (20 mg/kg, PO, every 8 hours) are effective, and a rapid response (1–3 days) to treatment is seen in most cases, although incomplete or transient resolution of signs occurs in a significant number of affected animals. Doxycycline is preferred over penicillins because mixed infections with other tick-borne pathogens are often found in animals with clinical signs. Symptomatic treatment for neuropathic pain may be indicated, in which case gabapentin is the recommended therapy; NSAIDs are less preferable because a wash-out period is required if the animal subsequently develops immune-mediated disease and requires immunosuppressive therapy. In dogs with kidney failure that is suspected to be related to Borrelia infection, supportive therapy is indicated, and immunosuppressive agents such as mycophenolate may be required for severe, rapidly progressing cases.  In horses, a number of tetracycline (administered orally and parenterally) and beta-lactam (administered parenterally) antibiotics have been successful in treating Lyme borreliosis. Treatment is more challenging in horses because of the poor bioavailability of antibiotics and because horses are often diagnosed long after they have been infected. Four-week courses of doxycycline (10 mg/kg, PO, twice a day) or minocycline (4 mg/kg, PO, twice a day) have reportedly been successful in treating Lyme borreliosis in horses. Although beta-lactams may be less practical because of parenteral administration and carry a risk of toxicity, they are preferable for treatment of neuroborreliosis. In these cases, parenteral high-dose penicillin (44,000 U/kg, IV, every 4–6 hours) or cefotaxime (25–50 mg/kg, IV, every 6–8 hours) may be useful. Certain antimicrobials (eg, ceftriaxone) have resulted in a high incidence of adverse effects in horses and should not be used.  Quantitative C6 antibody assays are sometimes performed before and after treatment to monitor response to therapy, although titers do not always decrease after treatment, and some animals remain seropositive. Successful treatment is therefore focused on the resolution of clinical signs rather than serologic data. An increased titer after treatment may represent a relapse or reinfection.  Control and Prevention of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals Tick Removal   Image Courtesy of Dr. Nadine A. Vogt.  Tick avoidance plays an important role in the control of Lyme borreliosis. A number of effective repellents and acaricides in collars, sprays, and spot-ons are available for use in dogs. Tick checks and prompt removal of ticks can reduce the likelihood of transmission, because at least 24 hours are required for transmission of spirochetes from tick to host. Ticks must be removed carefully. If the tick mouth parts are damaged and left in the animal, transmission of spirochetes may still occur, even after the tick has been removed.  A number of bacterin and recombinant vaccines are also licensed for use in dogs. Reported efficacies are variable (50%–100%), and evaluation of efficacy is challenging because of the lack of a disease model. The duration of immunity is 1 year. Dogs that have been exposed to ticks should be tested serologically for established infection before vaccination. Postinfection vaccination has little to no therapeutic effect on established infections.  Zoonotic Risk of Lyme Borreliosis in Animals Lyme borreliosis is a vector-borne zoonotic disease. Ticks transmit spirochetes from wildlife reservoirs to people. Companion and farm animals are not a reservoir, though they may harbor unattached infected ticks that can subsequently attach to a person and transmit spirochetes.  Key Points Lyme borreliosis is a bacterial, tick-transmitted disease of animals (dogs, horses, possibly cats) and people.  Transmission of Borrelia burgdorferi occurs during the blood meal of Ixodes spp ticks, and ticks may be active anytime temperatures are >4°C (40°F).  Dogs typically present with intermittent, shifting lameness, whereas horses may present with neurologic signs and/or uveitis.  Diagnosis is based on a combination of history of tick exposure, clinical signs, laboratory data, response to therapy, and exclusion of other diseases.  Clinically ill animals should be treated with a long course (4 weeks) of antibiotics (eg, doxycycline), and symptomatic therapy is used to manage pain and other conditions. Immunosuppressive therapy may be needed if an autoimmune reaction occurs.  The following preventive measures are available to reduce the risk of Lyme borreliosis: tick avoidance, prompt removal of ticks, acaricides, and vaccines.  In terms of zoonotic risk, companion and farm animals are not a direct source of infection but may harbor unattached infected ticks that can attach to people. Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, and Related Infections in Animals ByJanet E. Foley, DVM, PhD, Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis Reviewed/Revised Jul 2020 | Modified Sept 2024 Ehrlichiosis is a tick-transmitted disease that infects blood cells and can cause a variety of signs from none to fever and generalized achiness to possible fatality. Several species of bacteria cause ehrlichiosis, and some of the species infect humans as well as animals such as dogs. Diagnosis is based on signs, serology, and PCR. Doxycycline is the treatment of choice. Etiology | Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Prevention | Zoonotic Risk | Key Points | For More Information  Ehrlichiosis is an infection caused by obligate, intracellular bacteria that primarily affect cells of the immune system in dogs, cats, and people. In the past, the causative organisms were classified in the genus Ehrlichia on morphologic and ecologic grounds. With newer genetic analyses, these agents have been reclassified into the genera of Ehrlichia, Anaplasma, and Neorickettsia, all of which are in the family Anaplasmataceae. However, the term “ehrlichiosis” is still sometimes used to broadly describe these infections.  Etiology of Ehrlichiosis in Animals Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis is caused by Ehrlichia canis, which predominantly involves monocytes; although it is not considered a primary zoonosis, human infection with this agent has been occasionally reported. The closely related pathogen E chaffeensis causes human monocytic ehrlichiosis in the USA. Human cases are reported throughout the mid to southeastern and central USA.  Several published reports of monocytic ehrlichiosis in cats suggest that feline infection may occur, albeit uncommonly. E ewingii, which primarily infects the granulocytes of susceptible hosts, has been isolated from dogs and people in the southern, western, and midwestern USA. In 2009, an organism either identical or related to E muris (a pathogen of rodents) was identified as a cause of human illness in the upper Midwest; the role of this E muris–like (EML) agent as a possible pathogen of dogs or cats is currently unknown.  A phagocytophilum, formerly known as both E equi and the agent of human granulocytic ehrlichiosis, causes illness in dogs and horses. It also causes human illness in the USA, primarily in northeastern, upper midwestern, and western states. Infection with this agent is most appropriately referred to as anaplasmosis, and the pathogen is found predominantly in granulocytes.  A platys, which infects platelets, is the cause of infectious cyclic thrombocytopenia of dogs.  Epidemiology of Ehrlichiosis in Animals E canis is transmitted by the brown dog tick, Rhipicephalus sanguineus, which is found worldwide; accordingly, canine monocytic ehrlichiosis also has a worldwide distribution. Acute E canis cases in dogs may resemble infection with Rickettsia rickettsii (the agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, which can also be transmitted by the brown dog tick). Rhipicephalus ticks become infected with E canis after feeding on infected dogs, and ticks transmit infection to other dogs during blood meals taken in successive life stages. Blood transfusions, or other means by which infected WBCs can be transferred, may also transmit the pathogen. E chaffeensis and E ewingii have sylvatic cycles in the environment that involve tick species and wildlife reservoir hosts.  In the USA, E chaffeensis and E ewingii are transmitted by Amblyomma americanum, the lone star tick. White-tailed deer are considered reservoir hosts for E chaffeensis and dogs are a probable reservoir for E ewingii. A case of human E ewingii contracted via blood infusion has been reported, and organ transplantation of E chaffeensis infection has been suspected. The ecologic cycle for the EML agent has not yet been elucidated but is suspected to involve Ixodes scapularis, the black-legged tick.  A phagocytophilum is transmitted by Ixodes species of ticks; in the northeastern USA, infection is transmitted by I scapularis, whereas infection in western states is primarily associated with I pacificus, the Western black-legged tick. In nature, the enzootic cycle is most likely associated with small rodents. People and domestic animals are incidental hosts of these pathogens. Human-to-human transmission via transfusion of packed RBCs has been reported; the risk of canine-associated infections after blood transfusion is unknown.  A platys is transmitted by R sanguineus and is enzootic in many parts of the USA and worldwide. Coinfection with E canis may occur, because the same tick vector is responsible for transmission of both pathogens.  Clinical Findings of Ehrlichiosis in Animals In dogs, E canis causes the most potentially severe clinical presentation of the Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp. Signs arise from involvement of the hemic and lymphoreticular systems; many dogs experience self-limiting infection, but some may develop a secondary quiescent phase of disease followed by a severe and life-threatening third chronic stage.  Clinical findings in acute ehrlichiosis include:  reticuloendothelial hyperplasia  fever  generalized lymphadenopathy  splenomegaly  thrombocytopenia  Variable signs of anorexia, depression, loss of stamina, stiffness and reluctance to walk, edema of the limbs or scrotum, and coughing or dyspnea may be seen. Most acute cases are seen in the warmer months, coincident with the greatest activity of the tick vector. Chronic cases may present at any time of year.  During the acute phase of E canis infection in dogs, the hemogram is usually normal but may reflect a mild normocytic, normochromic anemia; leukopenia; or mild leukocytosis. Thrombocytopenia is common, but petechiae may not be evident, and platelet decreases may be mild in some animals. Lymph node aspiration reveals hyperplasia. Death is rare during this phase; spontaneous recovery may occur, the dog may remain asymptomatic, or chronic disease may ensue.  Chronic ehrlichiosis caused by E canis may develop in any breed, but certain breeds, eg, German Shepherds, may be predisposed. Seasonality is not a specific hallmark of chronic infection, because appearance of chronic signs may be variably delayed after acute infection. In chronic cases, the bone marrow becomes hypoplastic, and lymphocytes and plasmacytes infiltrate various organs. Vasculitis and immune-mediated mechanisms induce a thrombocytopenia and a risk of bleeding.  Clinical findings of chronic ehrlichiosis based on the predominant organs affected and may include:  marked splenomegaly  glomerulonephritis  renal failure  interstitial pneumonitis  anterior uveitis  meningitis (with associated cerebellar ataxia, depression, paresis, and hyperesthesia)  severe weight loss  The hemogram is usually markedly abnormal in chronic cases. Severe thrombocytopenia may cause epistaxis, hematuria, melena, and petechiae and ecchymoses of the skin. Variably severe pancytopenia (mature leukopenia, nonregenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia, or any combination thereof) may be seen. Aspiration cytology reveals reactive lymph nodes and, usually, marked plasmacytosis. Frequently, polyclonal, or occasionally monoclonal, hypergammaglobulinemia develops.  Other ehrlichial infections caused by E chaffeensis, E ewingii, or A phagocytophilum appear clinically similar to acute E canis infection, but the clinical course is usually milder and more self-limiting. Thrombocytopenia and mild leukopenia or leukocytosis may occur during the acute course of infection. Chronic canine disease, as seen with E canis infection, is not typically seen with other infections.  Dogs infected with A platys generally show minimal to no signs of infection despite the presence of the organism in platelets. The primary finding is cyclic thrombocytopenia, recurring at 10-day intervals. Generally, the cyclic nature diminishes, and the thrombocytopenia becomes mild and slowly resolves.  Lesions During the acute or self-limiting phase of E canis infections, lesions generally are nonspecific, but splenomegaly is common. Histologically, there is lymphoreticular hyperplasia and lymphocytic and plasmacytic perivascular cuffing. In chronic cases, these lesions may be accompanied by widespread hemorrhage and increased mononuclear cell infiltration in perivascular regions of many organs.  Diagnosis of Ehrlichiosis in Animals Based on clinical signs, serology, and PCR  Because hematologic abnormalities are common findings with ehrlichiosis infections, a CBC is an important screening test. Infected animals often have thrombocytopenia. The clinical diagnosis may be confirmed by demonstrating the organisms within WBCs or platelets, seen in intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies called morulae. This method of diagnosis lacks sensitivity, because low numbers of organisms make demonstration difficult. However, requesting a smear of concentrated buffy coat and examining the feathered edges of blood slides can improve sensitivity.  Serologic tests for ehrlichiosis are available based on enzyme immunoassays and immunofluorescent antibodies. The IgG antibody response to infection may be delayed for several weeks, and IgM titers can be low; thus, serology may be negative early in the course of the disease. Furthermore, antibodies can persist for months or years after infection, making serology problematic for diagnosis of clinically significant infection, particularly in highly enzootic areas where many dogs may have antibodies to these agents because of previous infections.  Testing of paired sera and demonstration of four-fold increased antibody titers is recommended to confirm infection when possible, although treatment of suspected cases should never be delayed or withheld on the basis of test results. Serologic cross-reactivity is strong among E canis, E chaffeensis, and E ewingii, and among A phagocytophilum and A platys. In people, the EML agent shows cross-reactivity to E chaffeensis. In some areas, ~50% of dogs infected with E canis also have a titer to A platys, which likely reflects coinfection; cross-reactivity between these agents is not seen.  Serologic testing may be done using in-house point-of-care tests and by sending blood to local diagnostic laboratories. Testing is often offered as part of "panels" for tickborne disease, and considerable care is required to interpret positive serology for one or more pathogens in light of compatible clinical illness.  PCR detects specific Ehrlichia and Anaplasma species in infected people and animals. Samples appropriate for PCR include blood, tissue aspirates, or biopsy specimens of reticuloendothelial organs, such as lymph nodes, spleen, liver, or bone marrow. PCR can also be used to detect the effectiveness of treatment in clearing infection although false-positive testing can occur briefly after treatment because the target for the test is DNA, which may remain at a site even after the pathogen has been killed. PCR is increasingly available through commercial veterinary laboratories as well as at veterinary schools and research institutions. PCR is also available through several commercial human laboratories.  Differential diagnoses for ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis include:  Acute stage:  Rocky Mountain spotted fever  brucellosis  blastomycosis  endocarditis  systemic lupus erythematosus  lymphosarcoma  Chronic stage:  estrogen toxicity  myelophthisis  immune-mediated pancytopenia  multisystemic diseases associated with specific organ dysfunction (eg, glomerulonephritis)  Treatment of Ehrlichiosis in Animals Doxycycline is the treatment of choice  Supportive care may be needed, especially for chronic cases  To treat infection with Ehrlichia and Anaplasma spp, the drug of choice is doxycycline because of its superior intracellular penetration and bacteriostatic properties against rickettsiae. Doxycycline is recommended for dogs of all ages. If infection is suspected, dogs should be treated empirically; treatment should not be withheld or delayed pending laboratory results. Early seronegative tests should not be considered a reason to stop therapy, because antibodies may take ≥1 week to develop in acute cases.  Recommended drug dosages for treatment of ehrlichiosis are:  Doxycycline: 5 mg/kg every 12 hours, or 10 mg/kg every 24 hours, PO or IV, for at least 28 days. Minocycline may be substituted if doxycycline is unavailable.  Tetracycline: 22 mg/kg, PO, three times a day (≥2 weeks, acute cases, 1–2 months, chronic cases)  Imidocarb diproprionate: 2 doses, 5–7 mg/kg, IM, 2 weeks apart (also effective for some strains of babesiosis)  In acute cases receiving appropriate antibiotic therapy, body temperature is expected to return to normal within 24–48 hours after treatment. In chronic cases associated with E canis infection, the hematologic abnormalities may persist for 3–6 months, although clinical response to treatment often occurs much sooner. If a dog is thought to have chronic ehrlichiosis, the E canis antibody titer and whole blood PCR should be repeated after 6 months of illness to confirm successful therapy. Serum titers that persist at lower but positive levels should be rechecked in another 6 months to ensure they are not increasing.  Supportive therapy may be necessary in animals with high fever or those with chronic disease complicated by wasting and specific organ dysfunction. NSAIDs and appropriate fluid therapy may help reduce fever. Animals with anemia or severe thrombocytopenia should be treated with platelet or whole-blood transfusions as appropriate, particularly if hemorrhage is extensive. Concurrent broad-spectrum antibiotics may be needed if a dog has severe leukopenia.  Prevention of Ehrlichiosis in Animals Prevention of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis is accomplished by controlling ticks on dogs. Dogs in areas infested by ticks should be limited from walking off-trail, in certain grassy areas, and where there may be ticks in some leaf litter. They should be examined after walks, with ticks removed carefully (to prevent human exposure), although it is unrealistic that owners will find all ticks in the coat of a dog. Multiple topical medications are available to prevent tick bites, and these should be used in compliance with labeling before bringing dogs into areas infested with ticks. Because R sanguineus infestations can be problematic in kennels and around homes, and longterm tick control is needed for management, use of effective long-acting collars on all susceptible dogs might be considered; collars containing propoxur, amitraz, or flumethrin have proven activity against R sanguineus.  Prevention of transfusion-associated transmission can be reduced by using seronegative screened blood donors, although new donors with a negative screen cannot be presumed free of infection for several weeks because they may be incubating infection. Prophylactic administration of tetracycline at a lower dosage (6.6 mg/kg/day, PO) is effective in preventing E canis infection in kennels where disease is endemic. Treatment must be extended for many months through at least one tick season if the endemic cycle is to be successfully eliminated, and tick control should be implemented as well.  Zoonotic Risk of Ehrlichiosis E chaffeensis, E ewingii, and A phagocytophilum are considered zoonoses. Despite the occurrence of disease in both animals and people, the involvement of a required intermediate tick vector for transmission means dogs and other infected animals do not pose a direct transmission risk in normal circumstances. Infection in dogs may indicate a heightened risk of human infections related to tick exposure in a given area.  Key Points Multiple ehrlichioses and anaplasmoses may be transmitted by ticks from wildlife to pets and people (or from dog to dog in the case of canine monocytic ehrlichiosis).  Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis have similar clinical manifestations, with acute fever and hematologic abnormalities.  Maintaining an index of suspicion for infection based on known tick activity, and using appropriate diagnostic testing, are important to make diagnoses of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis and to implement effective treatment.  For More Information The Companion Animal Parasite Council provides maps of the prevalence of ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in dogs in the USA and Canada, as well as an information page on both ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis.  Also see pet health content regarding ehrlichiosis in dogs and ehrlichiosis in cats.    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, and Related Infections in Animals Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Murine Typhus in Animals Salmon Poisoning Disease and Elokomin Fluke Fever in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs (Rickettsia rickettsii Infection) ByJanet E. Foley, DVM, PhD, Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis Reviewed/Revised Jul 2020 | Modified Sept 2024 Spotted fevers are diseases caused by a set of related bacteria in the Rickettsia genus, of which Rocky Mountain spotted fever is the most severe. After transmission of the pathogen through tick bite, patients may manifest a local eschar or characteristic rash, including petechial hemorrhage and other clinical outcomes of vasculitis. Diagnosis is by clinical signs and serology. Doxycycline is the treatment of choice. Etiology | Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Zoonotic Risk | Key Points | For More Information  Etiology of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Rocky Mountain spotted fever (RMSF) is a disease of people and dogs caused by Rickettsia rickettsii. R rickettsii and closely related members of the spotted fever group of rickettsiae are in parts of North, South, and Central America. These pathogens are transmitted primarily through the bites of infected ticks. Among the numerous related Rickettsia species, R rickettsii's ability to infect dogs is best-documented. The ability of genetically similar rickettsial organisms, such as R parkeri, to cause clinically similar disease in dogs is unknown. Because of their susceptibility to R rickettsii and relatively higher rates of tick exposure, dogs may serve as excellent sentinels of risk for R rickettsii infection in people. Clusters of disease are frequently reported in defined geographic areas, and temporally associated infections may be seen both in dogs and their owners.  Epidemiology of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs In the USA, Dermacentor variabilis (the American dog tick) and D andersoni (the Rocky Mountain wood tick) have been considered the primary vectors for R rickettsii, which is most common in North America is southeastern states in the USA. In South America, several Amblyomma spp of ticks have been implicated in transmission. Rhipicephalus sanguineus ticks (the brown dog tick) are the primary vector in some focal areas of Arizona, particularly on native American tribal lands. R sanguineus ticks are also associated with transmission of R rickettsii in Central America and with large, city-based outbreaks in Mexico.  The pathogen is acquired by larval and nymph stages of ticks while feeding on infected vertebrate hosts and is also passed from female ticks to progeny through transovarial transmission. Typically, very few individual ticks (eg, < 1% of Dermacentor spp ticks) carry R rickettsii, even in areas considered highly endemic. However, in highly enzootic regions of Arizona where R rickettsii is transmitted by the brown dog tick, as many as 5% of ticks may be infected.  Seroprevalence in dogs from endemic areas ranges from 4.3%–77%, but these values do not accurately reflect infection rates antirickettsial antibodies may cross-react among genetically similar rickettsiae. RMSF transmission through blood transfusion has been documented in a human case and should be considered when selecting canine blood donors. Direct transmission from dogs to people has not been reported, although human infection may occur after contact of abraded skin or conjunctiva with tick hemolymph or excreta during removal of engorged ticks from pets.  Clinical Findings in Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Dogs are highly susceptible to clinical infection with R rickettsii; in contrast, it is rarely diagnosed in cats. Early signs in dogs may include:  fever (up to 105°F [40.5°C])  anorexia  lymphadenopathy  polyarthritis  coughing or dyspnea  abdominal pain  vomiting and diarrhea  edema of the face or extremities  Petechial hemorrhages of the conjunctiva and oral mucosa may be seen in severe cases. Focal retinal hemorrhage may be seen during the early course of disease. Neurologic manifestations such as altered mental states, vestibular dysfunction, and paraspinal hyperesthesia may occur.  Thrombocytopenia is common. Leukopenia develops during the early stages of infection and, in untreated cases, is followed by progressive leukocytosis. Serum biochemical abnormalities may include hypoproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia, azotemia, hyponatremia, hypocalcemia, and increased liver enzyme activities. Case fatality rates of ~1%–10% are expected.  Lesions Vascular endothelial damage is due to direct cytopathic effects of the rickettsiae, which reproduce within endothelial cells. Vascular endothelial damage and thrombocytopenia contribute to development of petechiae and ecchymoses. Necrosis of the extremities (acryl gangrene) or disseminated intravascular coagulation can develop in severely affected dogs.  Diagnosis of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Based on clinical signs and serology  Dogs presenting with characteristic clinical signs of Rocky Mountain spotted fever, particularly fever or neurologic abnormalities, should be assessed for RMSF, and it is crucial to maintain an index of suspicion in areas where the tick vectors may be found. Differential diagnoses include other causes of fever of unknown origin; in areas where the brown dog tick is the main vector, most febrile dogs will likely be infected with Ehrlichia canis, which is more common than RMSF. Very early in infection, PCR of circulating blood may be positive, although many severely affected animals become PCR-negative as the bacteria become resident in endothelium. PCR of a tick-bite eschar can be useful when such a lesion is present. Suspect cases should be treated with appropriate antimicrobials without waiting for test confirmation, and the therapeutic response is usually dramatic, as it is in other canine rickettsial diseases.  Indirect fluorescent antibody titer (IFA) and ELISA are available for serologic testing. However, there is a high incidence of cross-reacting antibodies to a variety of non- and less-pathogenic spotted fever group rickettsiae, so a single seropositive test does not confirm RMSF as a cause of clinical disease. Dogs that have been sick for a week or more may develop very high titers, which can support a diagnosis, although antibodies may persist for months after acute RMSF infection. Demonstration of a 4-fold rise in titer over 2–4 weeks can retrospectively support that a dog has been infected with some type of Rickettsia.  Treatment of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Doxycycline is the treatment of choice  Antibiotic treatment for Rocky Mountain spotter fever should be administered based on clinical suspicion without waiting for results of serologic tests, because delayed administration of antibiotics may result in higher rates of severe or fatal outcome. Doxycycline is the treatment of choice, regardless of age of the dog, and should be administered at a dosage of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours, or 10 mg/kg every 24 hours, PO or IV, for 14–21 days. Tetracycline at 22 mg/kg, PO, every 8 hours for 14–21 days is also effective. Chloramphenicol has been used to treat RMSF in the past, but its use is associated with higher rates of fatal outcome in people, and it is not recommended. Other broad-spectrum antibiotics are ineffective against R rickettsii infection, and there is some evidence in human cases that use of fluoroquinolones may actually worsen infection.  Early seronegative tests should not be considered a reason to stop therapy, because antibodies may take ≥1 week to develop in acute cases. Supportive care for dehydration and hemorrhagic diathesis may be necessary. Because of alterations in vascular integrity, conservative rates of fluid administration are advised. Animals with neurologic dysfunction may have residual deficits. Immunity appears to be lifelong after natural infection; therefore, recurrent episodes should not be attributed to RMSF.  Precautions should be taken for the safe removal and control of ticks. In settings in which R rickettsii transmission from R sanguineus is suspected, medications and products with proven efficacy against this tick species are important to use. Because R sanguineus infestations can be problematic in kennels and around homes, and longterm tick control is needed for outbreak control, use of effective long-acting tick collars on all susceptible dogs might be considered; collars containing propoxur, amitraz, or flumethrin have proven activity against R sanguineus.  Zoonotic Risk of Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs R rickettsii is considered a zoonotic pathogen. The potential for household clustering and large urban outbreaks, particularly in areas with transmission by brown dog ticks, makes RMSF a disease of significant public health concern. Although clinical disease occurs both in animals and people, the involvement of a required intermediate tick vector for transmission means dogs and other infected animals do not pose a direct transmission risk in normal circumstances. Nevertheless, dogs are the main host for brown dog ticks, and overly abundant and stray dogs can increase overall risk for other dogs and people. Particularly in areas where transmission occurs via R sanguineus, close cooperation between veterinary, medical, and public health officials is important to achieve control.  Key Points Although there are multiple related Rickettsia species that can be transmitted to people, the most common in dogs and the most severe in people and dogs is Rickettsia rickettsii, the agent of Rocky Mountain spotted fever.  Infected dogs serve to increase risk for people and dogs where the vector is the brown dog tick, and in any region, the presence of infected dogs is a valuable sentinel for human risk.  RMSF causes disease primarily attributable to vasculitis and can be difficult to confirm as a diagnosis, requiring that clinicians know about the local prevalence, have an index of suspicion, and treat suspected cases as quickly as possible.  For More Information The Companion Animal Parasite Council has guidelines on Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever.  Also see pet health content regarding Rocky Mountain spotted fever in dogs.    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, and Related Infections in Animals Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Murine Typhus in Animals Salmon Poisoning Disease and Elokomin Fluke Fever in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Murine Typhus in Animals (Rickettsia typhi Infection, R felis Infection) ByJanet E. Foley, DVM, PhD, Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of California, Davis Reviewed/Revised Jul 2020 | Modified Sept 2024 Rickettsia typhi, the causative agent of murine typhus, and R felis are zoonotic pathogens maintained primarily in rodent reservoirs (rats, mice) that may also be associated with enzootic cycles involving opossums and domestic cats. Infection is transmitted to people and other animals through contact with infected fleas. Clinical signs in animals are not well documented. Diagnosis is based on serology and PCR. Doxycycline can be used for treatment if clinical signs are present. Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Zoonotic Risk | Key Points | For More Information  Epidemiology of Murine Typhus in Animals Murine typhus infection in people is primarily thought to occur through exposure of abraded skin with infectious flea feces; aerosolization of infectious materials may occur in limited settings. Dogs and cats are presumably exposed in a similar fashion. Known to occur worldwide, there are current foci of human cases of murine typhus in southern Texas, California, and Hawaii. The disease is thought to be underreported.  Clinical Findings in Murine Typhus in Animals Clinical illness associated with canine and feline infection with R typhi and R felis is not well documented, but evidence of exposure based on presence of antirickettsial antibodies has been noted, particularly in association with outbreaks of human disease.  Diagnosis of Murine Typhus in Animals Based on serology and PCR  An indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) titer assessed in paired sera is preferred for serologic testing and is most commonly used in conjunction with environmental assessments around a human outbreak. There is cross-reactivity with antibodies from other rickettsial infections, including R rickettsii, so assessments should ideally be made with paired sera. PCR of whole blood may also be used, but its sensitivity in assessing canine and feline infection is poor because the animals may not exhibit clinical signs during periods of rickettsemia, making it difficult to determine the optimal time for assessment. PCR can also be run on fleas obtained from pets to guide in documenting presence of typhus agents.  Treatment of Murine Typhus in Animals Doxycycline can be used if clinical signs are present  In the absence of clinical signs, specific treatment is not recommended. If clinical illness associated with R typhi or R felis infection is suspected in a dog or cat, doxycycline may be administered at a dosage of 5 mg/kg every 12 hours, or 10 mg/kg every 24 hours, PO or IV, for 10–21 days. Animals should be provided with routine preventive treatments to control fleas. Control programs involving animal removal from an area of enzootic activity should be accompanied by pesticide treatment of the environment to prevent fleas feeding on people after the removal of preferred blood-meal hosts.  Zoonotic Risk of Murine Typhus R typhi is a zoonotic pathogen. Serologic evidence of exposure or past infection in dogs or cats is consistent with a heightened risk of human infections in a given area, although serology cannot pinpoint which rickettsial organism is present. Flea control for pets is an essential component of disease control. A role as a possible reservoir for infection has been suggested for cats; however rats and opossums are much more important hosts of the bacteria and sources of the infected fleas. Nonetheless, dogs and cats may, at a minimum, serve as a source of fleas that may pose a transmission risk to people. Regular flea control is recommended to reduce risk of flea-associated transmission to people.  Key Points Murine typhus is a flea-transmitted zoonosis that is concentrated in a few foci in several states in North America.  Companion animals show no or few signs of disease but can host fleas that can be a source of spillover infection in people.  Reducing exposure to rats, opossums, and fleas are all means to reduce risk of transmission of murine typhus to people.  For More Information The Companion Animal Parasite Council has guidelines on fleaborne rickettsiosis.    Test your Knowledge nowTake a Quiz!  Download the free MSD Vet Manual App  About Disclaimer Cookie Preferences  This icon serves as a link to download the eSSENTIAL Accessibility assistive technology app for individuals with physical disabilities. It is featured as part of our commitment to diversity and inclusion. follow us on fb Copyright© 2025Merck & Co., Inc., Rahway, NJ, USA and its affiliates. All rights reserved.  IN THIS TOPIC OTHER TOPICS IN THIS CHAPTER Ehrlichiosis, Anaplasmosis, and Related Infections in Animals Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever in Dogs Murine Typhus in Animals Salmon Poisoning Disease and Elokomin Fluke Fever in Animals  logo PROFESSIONAL VERSION Salmon Poisoning Disease and Elokomin Fluke Fever in Animals (Neorickettsia spp Infection) ByYasuko Rikihisa, PhD, Department of Veterinary Biosciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, The Ohio State University Reviewed/Revised Jul 2020 | Modified Sept 2024 Salmon poisoning disease is an acute systemic disease of canids caused by Neorickettsia helminthoeca, gram-negative pleomorphic cocci. The disease is characterized by fever, anorexia, weakness, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy, typically of cervical and mesenteric lymph nodes. Diagnosis is by serology, PCR, or finding trematode eggs in feces. The treatment of choice is doxycycline; without treatment, infection is fatal in 90% of dogs. Etiology | Epidemiology | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Prevention and Treatment | Key Points | For More Information Topic Resources Audios (0) Calculators (0) Images (4) Tables (0) Videos (0)  The name salmon poisoning disease (SPD) is misleading, because no toxin is involved. Elokomin fluke fever (EFF) is an acute infectious disease of canids, ferrets, bears, and raccoons that resembles SPD but has a wider host range. EFF is caused by ingestion of metacercaria infected with Neorickettsia elokominica encysting in a fish. The only way to distinguish SPD from EFF is PCR, using specific primer pairs. In people, N sennetsu causes a disease known as Sennetsu fever, reported from western Japan, Laos, and Malaysia. In horses, N risticii and a new Neorickettsia species cause a disease known as Potomac horse fever; these have not been reported as a cause of illness in dogs except for one report of N risticii in Illinois.  Salmon poisoning disease, small intestine, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Yasuko Rikihisa.  Salmon poisoning disease, trematode   Image Courtesy of Dr. Yasuko Rikihisa  Etiology of Salmon Poisoning Disease in Animals Salmon poisoning disease is caused by N helminthoeca and is sometimes complicated by a second agent, N elokominica, which causes EFF. The reservoir and vector for these Neorickettsia agents is a small fluke, Nanophyetus salmincola. N elokominica also infects other species of trematodes in other species of fish. Dogs and other animals become infected by ingesting trout, salmon, or Pacific giant salamanders that contain the encysted metacercaria stage of the Neorickettsia-infected fluke. In the dog’s intestine, the metacercarial flukes excyst, embed in the duodenal mucosa, become gravid adults, and transmit the rickettsiae to macrophages in intestinal mucosa and lymphatic tissues and blood monocytes. The fluke infection itself produces little or no clinical disease. SPD or most likely EFF in captive Malayan sun bears and reintroduced grizzly bears underscore the need to consider this etiology in nonnative species with compatible exposure and clinical histories.  Epidemiology of Salmon Poisoning Disease in Animals The life cycle of Neorickettsia helminthoeca is maintained by the release of infected fluke ova in the feces of the mammalian host. Infected miracidia develop from these ova and infect the snails Juga plicifera and Juga silicula to form infected rediae. Rediae develop into infected cercariae that are released from the snail, penetrate the salmon or trout, and develop into encysted metacercariae infected with Neorickettsia. The cycle is completed when mammals eat the fish, and infected metacercariae become infected gravid adults and pass Neorickettsia to fluke eggs. Although Neorickettsia infection of dogs is not required for the life cycle of Neorickettsia, mammalian infection is required to maintain the trematode life cycle. Transmission by cage-to-cage contact, rectal thermometers, or aerosols is rare.  There are no age, sex, or breed predilections; however, the disease prevalence is higher when the availability of trematode-infected fish is greater. Infected fish are found in the Pacific Ocean from San Francisco to the coast of Alaska, but SPD is more prevalent from northern California to Puget Sound. It is also seen inland along the rivers of fish migration. SPD also has been reported in southern California and Brazil. The snail is the primary factor for geographic limitation, but dogs fed undercooked or raw fish from the supermarket may have developed SPD.  Clinical Findings in Salmon Poisoning Disease in Animals In salmon poisoning disease, signs appear suddenly, usually 5–7 days after eating infected fish, but may be delayed as long as 33 days and persist for 7–10 days before culminating in death in up to 90% of untreated animals. Body temperature peaks at 104°–107.6°F (40°–42°C) 1–2 days later, then gradually declines for 4–8 days and returns to normal. Frequently, animals are hypothermic before death. Fever is accompanied by depression and complete anorexia in virtually all cases. Persistent vomiting usually occurs by day 4 or 5. Vomiting occurs in most cases, and diarrhea, which develops by day 5–7, often contains blood and may be severe. Dehydration and extreme weight loss occur. When severe, the GI signs are clinically indistinguishable from those of canine parvoviral infection. Generalized lymphadenopathy develops in ~60% of cases. Nasal or conjunctival exudate may be present and mimic signs of distemper. Neutrophilia is common, but a marked, absolute leukopenia with a degenerative left shift may occur. Thrombocytopenia is reported in 94% of the cases. Serum chemistry values are normal.  Clinically, EFF can be either milder or as severe as SPD. Severe GI signs are less commonly seen in EFF infections, and lymphadenopathy may be a more pronounced finding. Case fatality rates with EFF in dogs can be lower, at ~10% of untreated cases.  Lesions Neorickettsia helminthoeca, dog   Image Courtesy of Dr. Yasuko Rikihisa.  Infection appears to chiefly affect the lymphoid tissues and intestines. There is enlargement of the GI lymph follicles, lymph nodes, tonsils, thymus, and to some extent, the spleen, with microscopic necrosis, hemorrhage, and hyperplasia. Remarkable abdominal or mesenteric lymphadenomegaly may be seen. A variable but often severe nonhemorrhagic enteritis is seen throughout the intestine with SPD but is less commonly seen with EFF. Microscopic foci of necrosis also appear apart from the follicles. Nonsuppurative meningitis or meningoencephalitis has been identified in some dogs.  Salmon poisoning disease, gross pathology   Image Courtesy of Dr. Yasuko Rikihisa  Diagnosis of Salmon Poisoning Disease in Animals Serology, PCR, or finding trematode eggs in feces  Other causes of fever of unknown origin, generalized lymphadenopathy, vomiting, and diarrhea are differential diagnoses. When diarrhea and exudative conjunctivitis occur, distemper should be considered. Fluke ova are found on fecal examination in ~92% of cases, which supports the diagnosis. The ova are oval, yellowish brown, rough-surfaced, and ~87–97 × 35–55 mcm, with an indistinct operculum and a small, blunt point on the opposite end. During the first day or two, few ova may be passed. Intracellular organisms have been demonstrated by Romanowsky staining on lymph node aspirates in ~70% of cases.  Serologic tests using the N helminthoeca organism have been developed. These include an IFA using N helminthoeca-infected cultured cells as the antigen) and immunoblot assays using purified bacteria or recombinant N helminthoeca outer membrane proteins, P51, and/or strain‐variable surface antigen.  PCR testing to detect DNA specific to N helminthoeca (or pan-Neorickettsia species) is recommended for accurate diagnosis.  Prevention and Treatment of Salmon Poisoning Disease in Animals Treatment of choice is doxycycline  Treatment options include parenteral oxytetracycline (7 mg/kg, IV, three times a day for 5 days) or doxycycline (10 mg/kg, twice daily for 7 days). Oral tetracycline or doxycycline are contraindicated when GI signs are present. Sulfonamides are not effective and may worsen the clinical disease.  Animals usually succumb because of dehydration, electrolyte and acid-base imbalances, and anemia. Therefore, general supportive therapy to maintain hydration and acid-base balance, while meeting nutritional requirements and controlling diarrhea, is often essential. Judicious use of whole blood transfusions may be helpful.  Currently, the only means of prevention is to restrict the ingestion of uncooked salmon, trout, steelhead, and similar freshwater fish. In animals that recover, a profound humoral immune response persists, but there is no cross-resistance between N helminthoeca and N elokominica.  Key Points Salmon poisoning disease and Elokomin fluke fever are systemic infections caused in dogs and other canids and carnivores by Neorickettsia species found in flukes carried by freshwater fish.  The diseases are characterized by fever, anorexia, weakness, weight loss, and lymphadenopathy  Supportive care and parenteral oxytetracycline or doxycycline are the recommended treatments.  Prevention requires restricting access to uncooked fish. Canine Herpesvirus Infection ByKate E. Creevy, DVM, MS, DACVIM-SAIM, College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A & M University; Jeremy B. Evans, DVM, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2022 | Modified Mar 2025 Canine herpesvirus infection is a systemic viral infection that affects puppies worldwide, with mortality rates often reaching 100% in affected litters. Clinical signs, though severe, are nonspecific and can include anorexia, weight loss, inappropriate vocalization, blindness, abdominal distention, dyspnea or tachypnea, and diarrhea. For neonatal infections, treatment consists of nonspecific supportive care. Etiology and Pathogenesis | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Prevention | Key Points | For More Information  Canine herpesvirus is considered a potential cause of any acute neonatal puppy death or failure to thrive. No vaccine is available in the US. Because the disease progresses rapidly in susceptible neonates, antemortem diagnosis is difficult; it is possible, however, if clinical signs are recognized promptly and antibody or PCR assays are used. The disease is diagnosed most often during necropsy, via PCR assay and microscopy of affected tissues. For neonatal infections, treatment consists of nonspecific supportive care, but the overall prognosis is guarded to grave.  Clinically, neonatal canine herpesvirus is characterized by the following:  severe nonspecific systemic signs in a neonatal puppy  diarrhea, inappetence, lack of weight gain  tachypnea, pneumonia  corneal edema, conjunctivitis  lack of fever  rapidly progressive illness  failure to thrive or sudden death  Canine herpesvirus infection is best known as a severe viral infection of puppies; however, increasingly sensitive molecular diagnostics have enabled its recognition in adult dogs with upper respiratory infection, ocular disease, or vesicular vaginitis or posthitis, as well as in dogs with no clinical signs. As is typical of herpesviruses, recovery from clinical signs is associated with lifelong latent infection. Only canids (dogs, wolves, coyotes) are known to be susceptible. The seroprevalence in dog populations worldwide ranges from 20% to 98%, depending on the region and population studied. Because latently infected animals may transiently convert to seronegative status, any seroprevalence study likely underestimates the true rate of exposure and carriage.  Etiology and Pathogenesis of Canine Herpesvirus Infection Infectious canine herpesvirus is due to an enveloped DNA canine herpesvirus (CHV) that is relatively unstable outside the host, so close contact is required for transmission.  CHV is usually transmitted by contact between susceptible individuals and the infected oral, nasal, or vaginal secretions of shedding dogs. Many dogs shedding virus exhibit no clinical signs. Immunologically naive pregnant bitches are at risk of acute infection, which may be transmitted to fetuses or neonatal pups; previously infected bitches are unlikely to transmit infection. The most important systemic disease occurs in fetal or neonatal puppies as a result of in utero infection or infection in the first 3 weeks of life. After this time, natural resistance to infection improves as puppies mature and maintain a higher body temperature.  Infection of susceptible animals results in the replication of CHV in the surface cells of the nasal mucosa, pharynx, and tonsils. In newborn susceptible pups or other immunocompromised dogs, viremia arises and diverse visceral organs are invaded. Primary systemic infection is associated with copious viral shedding; shedding by latently infected animals after clinical or subclinical recrudescence is of lesser severity and duration.  Clinical Findings of Canine Herpesvirus Infection Because canine herpesvirus replicates more efficiently at the lower body temperatures maintained by neonates, deaths due to CHV infection occur usually in puppies 1–3 weeks old, occasionally in puppies up to 1 month old, and rarely in pups as old as 6 months. Typically, onset is sudden, and death occurs after an illness of ≤ 24 hours. If clinical signs are observed, they may include lethargy, decreased suckling, diarrhea, nasal discharge, conjunctivitis, corneal edema, erythematous rash, oral or genital vesicles (rarely), and the notable absence of fever. Thoracic radiographs show a diffuse unstructured interstitial pattern that is typical of viral pneumonitis; in contrast to other viral diseases of puppies, however, leukocytosis may be present.  Older dogs exposed to or experimentally inoculated with CHV may develop mild upper respiratory tract signs, which may be part of the kennel cough syndrome (infectious tracheobronchitis). They may also develop vesicular vaginitis or posthitis. Conjunctivitis and dendritic corneal ulcers have also been reported in the absence of other upper respiratory signs. Acutely infected pregnant bitches may abort a litter or deliver a partially stillborn litter; however, they seldom exhibit other clinical signs, and future breeding is likely to be successful.  Lesions The characteristic gross lesions of CHV infection at necropsy consist of disseminated focal necrosis and hemorrhages. The most pronounced lesions occur in the lungs, cortical portion of the kidneys, adrenal glands, liver, and GI tract. All lymph nodes are enlarged and hyperemic, and the spleen is swollen. Lesions may also be found in the eyes and CNS. The basic histologic lesion is necrosis, with hemorrhage in the adjacent parenchyma. The inflammatory reaction in many organs may be limited; however, marked neutrophilic and mononuclear infiltration is observed in ocular lesions. Single, small, basophilic, intranuclear inclusion bodies are most common in areas of necrosis in the lung, liver, and kidneys; occasionally, they are evident as faintly acidophilic bodies located within the nuclear space.  Diagnosis of Canine Herpesvirus Infection Clinical evaluation  Serologic testing  Clinical signs of canine herpesvirus infection are often nonspecific. Any neonatal puppy that suddenly dies or is systemically ill without the presence of a fever should be considered a potential case of CHV. Older dogs with mild respiratory or ocular signs may also be infected. Prompt clinical recognition of CHV is needed to achieve antemortem diagnosis. Antibody ELISA or PCR assays can be used to confirm the diagnosis.  Necropsy of one deceased puppy in an affected litter may be the most efficient diagnostic strategy. In systemically affected puppies, CHV infection may be confused with infectious canine hepatitis; however, it is not accompanied by the thickened, edematous gallbladder often associated with the latter. The focal areas of necrosis and hemorrhage, especially those that occur in the kidneys, distinguish CHV infection from hepatitis and neosporosis. CHV causes serious disease only in very young puppies. The rapid death and characteristic lesions distinguish it from canine distemper.  Hemagglutination, ELISA, and immunofluorescence antibody tests are available, and PCR is highly sensitive and specific when used on fresh tissue and fluid samples. In cases of neonatal mortality, the diagnosis typically is made postmortem with virus isolation from fresh lung, liver, kidney, and spleen by cell culture techniques, followed by identification using PCR assay and sequencing, transmission electron microscopy, immunofluorescence, or fluorescence in situ hybridization. The tissues should be submitted to the laboratory refrigerated but not frozen.  Treatment of Canine Herpesvirus Infection Supportive care  The mainstay of treatment for canine herpesvirus infection is supportive care, which can include provision of each of the following:  balanced IV electrolyte solutions with or without dextrose supplementation to address dehydration, maintain volume status, and correct possible neonatal hypoglycemia  antinausea medications  supplemental oxygen  antimicrobials for possible secondary bacterial infections  active warming  supplemental nutrition  Treatment is typically unrewarding in systemically affected puppies, and the prognosis for puppies that do survive is guarded because damage to lymphoid organs, brain, kidneys, and liver may be irreparable. Before the onset of clinical signs in littermates or other nearby puppies, rearing in incubators at an increased temperature (35°C [95°F], 50% relative humidity) and/or passive immunization with intraperitoneal serum may decrease losses within an exposed litter. Limited studies with antiviral agents are inconclusive; however, any possibility of success requires immediate recognition and treatment.  Adult dogs with ocular, respiratory, or genital disease often experience mild and self-limiting clinical signs of CHV infection. Ophthalmic antivirals, such as cidofovir (0.5% every 12 hours) or trifluridine (1% every 4–6 hours), have been used successfully to treat ocular infections in adult dogs and may be useful for persistent or painful ocular lesions.  Prevention of Canine Herpesvirus Infection No vaccine against canine herpesvirus infection is currently available in the US. Previously infected bitches generally develop antibodies, and litters that follow the first infected litter receive maternal antibodies in the colostrum. Puppies that receive maternal antibodies may be infected with the virus, but disease does not result. Isolation of pregnant bitches from other dogs during the last 3 weeks of gestation and first 3 weeks postpartum, with excellent hygiene by human handlers, is the most effective way to minimize risk to puppies. Because of the high seroprevalence among adult dogs and because virus may be shed by clinically normal individuals, complete avoidance of exposure is not a reasonable management strategy for most dogs.  With regard to disinfection of veterinary and kennel premises, canine herpesvirus is sensitive to lipid solvents (such as ether and chloroform) and to most disinfectants.  Key Points Canine herpesvirus infection is a rapidly progressive and fatal multisystemic disease of neonatal puppies. It can result in lifelong latent infections and can lead to mild respiratory and ocular signs in older dogs.  Diagnosis depends on recognition of the characteristic clinical signs in an at-risk dog, followed by specific detection of the virus itself, or an immune response against the virus.  No vaccine is available in the US. Treatment is primarily supportive; after disease onset, however, the prognosis is generally poor for puppies. Prophylactic administration of immunized serum and of antiviral medications may be helpful to reduce risk of infection in exposed littermates. nfectious Canine Hepatitis ByKate E. Creevy, DVM, MS, DACVIM-SAIM, College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A & M University; Jeremy B. Evans, DVM, Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences, Texas A&M University Reviewed/Revised Nov 2022 | Modified Sept 2024 Adenoviral hepatitis in dogs results in fever, vasculitis and hepatitis, with possible sequelae of coagulopathy and subsequent immune-mediated corneal or renal effects. Most dogs recover but the disease can be fatal. Treatment is supportive; ante-mortem diagnosis is by PCR, ELISA or serology. Vaccination with modified live canine adenovirus-2 is protective against this disease caused by canine adenovirus-1, and is considered a core vaccine. Etiology and Pathogenesis | Clinical Findings | Diagnosis | Treatment | Prevention | Key Points | For More Information  Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) due to canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1) is a worldwide, infectious disease of dogs, with clinical signs that vary from a slight fever and congestion of the mucous membranes to severe depression, marked leukopenia, and coagulation disorders. Clinical signs and laboratory abnormalities often relate to the tendency of the virus to cause hepatocellular necrosis and diffuse endothelial cell damage; however, virus-associated immune complex deposition can also lead to uveitis, corneal clouding, and glomerulonephritis. Diagnosis can be made by the use of ELISA, serologic, or PCR testing, and postmortem diagnostics include identification of intranuclear inclusion bodies in the liver, PCR assay, and/or FISH of infected tissue.  Although the disease results from infection by CAV-1, administration of live, attenuated CAV-2 vaccine results in adequate protection. Supportive care is aimed at maintaining fluid balance, addressing hepatic dysfunction, managing the coagulopathic state, and treating secondary bacterial infections. The mortality rate ranges from ~10% to 30%; in some surviving dogs, however, organ disease such as hepatitis or glomerulonephritis may persist after recovery.  ICH has also been reported in foxes, wolves, coyotes, bears, lynx, and some pinnipeds; other carnivores may become infected without developing clinical illness. The disease has become uncommon in areas where routine immunization is performed; however, periodic outbreaks, which may reflect maintenance of the disease in wild and feral hosts, reinforce the need for continued vaccination.  Etiology and Pathogenesis of Infectious Canine Hepatitis Infectious canine hepatitis is due to a nonenveloped DNA virus, canine adenovirus 1 (CAV-1), which is antigenically related to CAV-2 (one of the causes of canine infectious tracheobronchitis).  Oronasal exposure to urine, feces, or saliva from infected dogs is the main route of infection. Transmission via either fomites or ectoparasites is also possible. Recovered dogs shed virus in their urine for ≥ 6 months. Initial infection occurs in the tonsillar crypts and regional lymph nodes, followed by viremia and disseminated infection. Vascular endothelial cells are the primary target; hepatic and renal parenchyma, spleen, and lungs become infected as well. Chronic kidney lesions and corneal clouding (blue eye) result from immune-complex reactions after recovery from acute or subclinical disease.  Clinical Findings of Infectious Canine Hepatitis Clinical signs of infectious canine hepatitis vary from a slight fever to peracute death. The mortality rate ranges from 10% to 30% and is typically highest in very young dogs. Concurrent parvoviral or distemper infection worsens the prognosis. The incubation period is 4–9 days. The first sign is commonly fever of > 40°C (104°F), which lasts 1–6 days and is usually biphasic. If the fever is of short duration, leukopenia may be the only other sign; if fever persists for > 1 day, however, acute illness develops.  Clinical signs may include:  nonspecific signs such as lethargy, thirst, or anorexia  conjunctivitis, serous oculonasal discharge, or corneal clouding (blue eye)  abdominal pain and vomiting, including hematemesis  signs consistent with coagulopathy or vasculitis, such as petechia of the oral mucosa  In some cases, the tonsils may be enlarged, and tachycardia out of proportion to the fever may occur. There may be subcutaneous edema of the head, neck, and trunk. Despite hepatic involvement, there is a notable absence of icterus in most acute clinical cases.  Clotting time is directly correlated with the severity of illness; vascular endothelial compromise can lead to disseminated intravascular coagulation, coupled with failure of the liver to rapidly replace consumed clotting factors. It may be difficult to control hemorrhage, which is manifested by bleeding around deciduous teeth and by spontaneous hematomas.  CNS involvement is unusual and may represent either hepatic encephalopathy or intracranial vasculitis, hemorrhage, or thrombosis. Severely infected dogs may develop seizures from forebrain damage. Paresis may result from brainstem hemorrhages, and ataxia and central blindness have also been described. Foxes more consistently have CNS signs and intermittent seizures during the course of illness, and paralysis may involve one or more limbs or the entire body. Dogs with ICH usually do not show respiratory signs; however, CAV-1 has been recovered from dogs with clinical signs of infectious tracheobronchitis.  Clinicopathologic findings reflect the coagulopathy, when present (prolonged prothrombin time, thrombocytopenia, and increased fibrin degradation products). Severely affected dogs show acute hepatocellular injury (increased ALT and AST activity). Proteinuria is common. Leukopenia typically persists throughout the febrile period. The extent of leukopenia varies and seems to be correlated with the severity of illness.  On recovery, dogs eat well but regain weight slowly. Hepatic transaminase activities peak around day 14 of infection and then decline slowly. In ~25% of recovered dogs, bilateral corneal opacity develops 7–10 days after acute clinical signs disappear, and it usually resolves spontaneously. In mild cases, transient corneal opacity may be the only clinical sign of disease.  Lesions Endothelial damage results in “paint brush” hemorrhages on the gastric serosa, lymph nodes, thymus, pancreas, and subcutaneous tissues. Hepatic cell necrosis produces a variegated color change in the liver, which may be normal in size or swollen. Histologically, there is centrilobular necrosis, with neutrophilic and monocytic infiltration, and hepatocellular intranuclear inclusions. The gallbladder wall is typically edematous and thickened; edema of the thymus may be found. Grayish white foci may be evident in the kidney cortex.  Diagnosis of Infectious Canine Hepatitis Clinical evaluation  Testing  Although clinical signs of infectious canine hepatitis can be nonspecific, any young puppy with evidence of severe hepatic dysfunction, coagulopathy or disseminated intravascular coagulation, or corneal clouding should be considered a suspect for ICH. Commercially available ELISA, serologic, and PCR tests are available to obtain an antemortem diagnosis.  Usually, the abrupt onset of illness and bleeding suggest ICH, although clinical evidence is not always sufficient to differentiate ICH from canine distemper. Definitive antemortem diagnosis is not required before supportive care is instituted; however, it can be pursued with commercially available ELISA, serologic, and PCR testing. PCR assay or restriction fragment length polymorphism is required to definitively distinguish CAV-1 from CAV-2, if clinically necessary. Postmortem gross changes in the liver and gallbladder are more conclusive, and diagnosis is confirmed by virus isolation, immunofluorescence, detection of characteristic intranuclear inclusion bodies in the liver, or PCR or fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis of infected tissue.  Treatment of Infectious Canine Hepatitis Supportive care  The treatment for infectious canine hepatitis is supportive care, which includes the following goals:  to provide fluid support (balanced IV electrolyte solutions and dextrose supplementation as necessary)  to maintain adequate nutrition  to address coagulopathy (plasma and/or whole blood transfusions and/or anticoagulant therapy)  to limit secondary bacterial invasion (IV antimicrobials)  Although transient corneal opacity (which may occur during the course of ICH or may be associated with the administration of live, attenuated CAV-1 vaccines) usually requires no treatment, applying atropine ophthalmic ointment may alleviate the painful ciliary spasm sometimes associated with it. Dogs with corneal clouding should be protected against bright light. Systemic corticosteroids are contraindicated for the treatment of corneal opacity associated with ICH.  Prevention of Infectious Canine Hepatitis Injectable modified live virus (MLV) vaccines are available and are often combined with other vaccines. Vaccination against infectious canine hepatitis is recommended at the time of canine distemper vaccination. Maternal antibody from immune bitches interferes with active immunization in puppies until they are 9–12 weeks old.  Live, attenuated CAV-1 vaccines have produced transient unilateral or bilateral opacities of the cornea, and the virus may be shed in urine. For these reasons, live, attenuated CAV-2 strains, which provide cross-protection against CAV-1, are preferentially administered because they have very little tendency to produce corneal opacities or uveitis, and the virus is not shed in urine.  Historically, annual revaccination against ICH was standard, and many vaccines are labeled for annual administration. Increasing evidence suggests that immunity induced by injectable MLV CAV-1 vaccines lasts ≥ 3 years, and labels of some commercial vaccines are beginning to reflect a longer revaccination interval.  With regard to disinfection of veterinary premises and kennels, it should be noted that CAV-1 is durable in the environment, surviving outside the host for weeks or months. It is resistant to lipid solvents (such as ether), as well as to acid and formalin; however, it can be inactivated by steam cleaning or by exposure to a 1%–3% solution of sodium hypochlorite (household bleach).  Key Points Infectious canine hepatitis is a viral disease that affects young dogs and can be accompanied by a wide variety of clinical signs, ranging from fever and lethargy to hepatic failure, severe coagulopathy, and death.  Diagnosis can be obtained by ELISA, PCR assay, or serologic evaluation, but is not required before initiation of treatment, which consists mainly of supportive care.  Supportive care is aimed at maintaining nutrition and adequate fluid balance while addressing hepatic dysfunction and bleeding tendencies.  Approximately 10%–30% of affected puppies die from CAV-1; however, vaccination with MLV CAV-2 provides adequate protection.  Overview of Fungal Infections in Animals (Mycoses) ByTamara Gull, DVM, PhD, DACVM, DACVIM (LA), DACVPM, University of Missouri, Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory Reviewed ByAngel Abuelo, DVM, PhD, DABVP, DECBHM, FHEA, MRCVS, Michigan State University, College of Veterinary Medicine Reviewed/Revised Apr 2023 | Modified Sept 2024 Systemic mycoses are infections with fungal organisms that exist in the environment, enter the host from a single portal of entry, and disseminate within the host to multiple organ systems. The soil reservoir is the primary source of most infections, which can be acquired by inhalation, ingestion, or traumatic introduction of fungal elements. Certain fungi are ubiquitous; others are more regionally specific. Treatment is prolonged in all cases.  Pathogenic fungi establish infection in apparently normal hosts, and such diseases as histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, and cryptococcosis are regarded as primary systemic mycoses. Opportunistic fungi are more likely to establish infection in an immunosuppressed host, but this is not a prerequisite to infection in animals. Prolonged administration of antimicrobials or immunosuppressive agents appears to increase the likelihood of infection by the opportunistic fungi that cause diseases such as aspergillosis and candidiasis, which may be focal or systemic.  Clinical findings, gross lesions and serology are often suggestive of systemic mycoses; however, definitive diagnosis requires microscopic identification, culture of the organism, or PCR assay. Identification of the fungus and the tissue reaction via microscopic examination of exudates and biopsy material is adequate for diagnosis of histoplasmosis, cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, coccidioidomycosis, and sporotrichosis. Other diseases, such as candidiasis, aspergillosis, phaeohyphomycosis, hyalohyphomycosis, and oomycosis (pythiosis and lagenidiosis), require more than microscopic evaluation for a definitive diagnosis.  Some fungi are commonly found as normal flora as well as contaminants of cultures; thus, tissue invasion and reaction must be demonstrated for the culture isolation to be considered noteworthy. Serologic testing may be useful for diagnosis (and prognosis) of some mycotic diseases such as coccidioidomycosis, pythiosis, and lagenidiosis. Antigen titers have proved useful for cryptococcosis, histoplasmosis, and blastomycosis.  For treatment,seediscussions of specific systemic mycoses below and under pharmacotherapeutics of the integumentary system.