Photo Courtesy Dr. Sharon Buschette
Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 08, 2023
Published: January 31, 2012
DO NOT GIVE IBUPROFEN TO DOGS OR CATS. IT IS UNSAFE TO DO SO.
Ibuprofen has been available as a human
pain reliever in the United States since 1974.
In 1984, tablets up to 200 mg became overthe-counter, and such brands as Motrin,
Advil, and Nuprin became household names.
Ibuprofen has been prescribed for all
manner of human aches and pains as well
as for other less common problems. It is a
common remedy found in many, if not most,
homes and offices all over America, and
because it is so familiar, it may be tempting
to use it on a pet. Please don't.
Medications are not approved for human
over-the-counter use unless they show a
good safety margin and their use is difficult to
botch. The problem is that every species is different, and what is safe for humans can be
lethal to a dog or cat.
Pet Exposure
When pets have pain, people want a simple solution and tend to look in their own
medicine cabinet just as they would for themselves. It is, unfortunately, common for
people to make an assumption that a safe medication for people will also be safe for pets,
and a number of animals are poisoned by ibuprofen when their owner attempts a simple
treatment for pain. Alternatively, playful animals may knock over a bottle of pills and
swallow an unknown quantity.
Never use any medication on your pet without checking with your veterinarian.
Do not attempt to extrapolate dosing from one species to another.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDS)
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (called NSAIDs) inhibit an enzyme called
cyclooxygenase. This enzyme is involved in the production of inflammatory chemicals
called prostaglandins. When the inflammatory cascade is active, cells use their
cyclooxygenase enzymes to begin to convert fats from their cell membranes into
prostaglandins. NSAIDs put a stop to this. Prostaglandins are not produced, and the
cascade of inflammation is stopped.

8/4/25, 12:30 PM Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=5276921&ind=598&objTypeID=1007 1/3
It turns out that there are several types of cyclooxygenase, however. Some types are
involved in producing inflammatory prostaglandins and others involved in producing
prostaglandins needed for normal body functions. Ibuprofen is what is called a nonselective cyclooxygenase inhibitor, which means it inhibits all types of cyclooxygenase,
not just the ones that produce inflammatory mediators.
Ibuprofen inhibits prostaglandins
involved in the blood supply to the
stomach as well as the blood supply
to the kidneys.
In humans, these effects are minor
enough that they do not preclude
approval for over-the-counter use, but
in dogs or cats, these issues are lifethreatening. It turns out that dogs and
cats are much more sensitive to these
issues than people.
Stomach Ulceration
Ibuprofen has a very narrow safety
margin in dogs, and since numerous
safer medications are readily
available, it is very rarely ever
prescribed. Ibuprofen is too toxic for
cats at any dose. A typical pill has 200
mg of ibuprofen, which is actually
quite a lot, so it doesn't take many
pills to cause poisoning.
The first level of toxicity involves ulceration of the stomach. This leads to vomiting with or
without blood, appetite loss, and/or stools that are black from digested blood. The worstcase scenario is a rupture of the stomach, leading to death. Repeated use of ibuprofen
will increase the risk of toxicity, even at doses that would not be toxic in single exposures.
Ibuprofen inhibits the production of prostaglandins needed for normal blood circulation to
the stomach. Without normal blood flow, the stomach cannot produce a proper protective
layer of mucous to protect its tissues from the harsh digestive acid it contains. Ulceration
results. Treatment involves intravenous fluids to restore circulation and medications to
heal the ulceration.
Kidney Failure
The next level of toxicity occurs at higher doses. After interfering with blood flow to the
stomach, the blood flow to the kidneys comes next. Reduced blood flow through the
kidneys leads to death of kidney tissue. As kidney function decreases, toxins that the
kidneys normally remove from the body begin to build up. Damage may be permanent or
temporary depending on how much ibuprofen was ingested and how healthy the kidneys
were prior to poisoning.
Kidney failure is a metabolic disaster with numerous aspects to be addressed. In the short
term, symptoms include nausea, further ulceration of the gastrointestinal tract, low body
temperature, and diarrhea. It may be possible to avoid toxicity of the kidneys by beginning
intravenous fluids promptly and supporting circulation despite the NSAIDs in the patient’s
system. If toxicity is severe enough to cause the patient to stop making urine, the
prognosis is substantially worse, and treatment must be more aggressive.
Cats are more sensitive to kidney failure effects than are dogs.

8/4/25, 12:30 PM Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=5276921&ind=598&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Neurologic Signs
The final level of toxicity is neurologic. At very high doses of ibuprofen, the patient will
have tremors that can progress to outright seizures and, ultimately, coma. The patient will
need to be supported with medications to control the involuntary muscle contractions until
the ibuprofen is out of the patient’s system.
Treatment and Monitoring
As with other poisoning situations, if the patient is seen promptly (like within an hour or
possibly two), it may be possible to induce vomiting. This can be done at your
veterinarian’s office or possibly as directed by a toxicologist at the Animal Poison Control
Center (APCC, see below). Activated charcoal can be given by your veterinarian to
prevent any un-vomited ibuprofen from being absorbed into the body.
Unfortunately, ibuprofen toxicity is common enough that a basic protocol has been put
forth by APCC. Typically, 48 hours of intravenous fluids are needed to support the
stomach and kidneys. Kidney function tests must be monitored and, if possible, this is
done at intervals over three days following the poisoning event. Medications to prevent
stomach ulcers/protect the stomach are frequently needed for a week or so. Strong
antacids such as famotidine or omeprazole are commonly used. Sucralfate is often used
to form protective webbing over any erosions in the stomach. Misoprostol is a
prostaglandin protective to the stomach that can be given orally and is often included in
treatment.
The prognosis depends on how much ibuprofen the pet was exposed to, for how long, and
how complete the treatment is.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5276921&pid=19239
b6a348b1-aa75-4708-9ca2-74a861126d25.1754290826
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:30 PM Ibuprofen Toxicity in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=5276921&ind=598&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Photo courtesy of MarVistaVet.com
Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 17, 2024
Published: January 01, 2001
Red Blood Cell Destruction
Most people have at least a passing familiarity with
hemoglobin. Hemoglobin is the iron-containing protein
that is responsible for the red color of blood. It binds the
oxygen we breathe in and carries it to our tissues,
exchanging oxygen for carbon dioxide and carrying that
to our lungs to be exhaled away. Our red blood cells
have no nucleus and no DNA, and they do not
participate in most normal cellular functions; they are
simply bags of hemoglobin being conducted around our
blood vessels.
A normal canine red blood cell lives approximately 120
days (60 days for feline red cells), and it dies when it
either becomes too stiff to fold itself through tiny
capillaries and bursts trying to do so, or it simply cannot generate enough energy to keep
itself alive.
The spleen is responsible for removing old red blood cells. The spleen possesses many
tortuous, winding blood vessels where red blood cells may break if they are not supple
enough to pass through. The spleen then collects the hemoglobin for recycling, but since
hemoglobin by itself is not safe for release into the bloodstream, a conversion is
necessary. The hemoglobin is broken into a protein part (which is broken apart and
recycled), iron (also broken off even further and recycled) and heme which is converted
into a substance called bilirubin for transport. Bilirubin is sent to the liver to be chemically
processed for removal (the process is called conjugation). This process enables the
bilirubin to dissolve in water so that it can be excreted in bile and disposed of through the
intestinal tract. Bilirubin is responsible for the brown color of feces.
If too many red blood cells are being destroyed at once, the systems described above get
overwhelmed.
What is Hemolysis?
Hemolysis is the destruction of red blood cells. Red blood cells may be destroyed by:
immune-mediated pathways (in which the immune system treats red blood cells
as foreign cells to be destroyed)
the spleen’s pathways described above
parasites that live in or on the red blood cell (such as Mycoplasma haemofelis).
toxins such as zinc or copper
infections or tumors.

8/4/25, 12:31 PM Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=4951445&ind=599&objTypeID=1007 1/3
This dog has swallowed a coin (readily visible as a white
disk in the stomach). Photo courtesy of Jennie Marvelle,
DVM, Boothbay Animal Hospital Boothbay, ME
When too many red blood cells are destroyed, the body’s mechanisms for processing
hemoglobin are overwhelmed, and bilirubin builds up. The patient may be obviously
yellow (jaundiced or icteric) when the mucous membranes are examined. The serum may
be yellow when checked in a blood sample. If the blood cells are being destroyed in the
bloodstream rather than in the spleen, the urine will turn red or rust-colored. Hemoglobin
is toxic to the kidneys, and kidney failure is a strong possibility. Excessive hemolysis must
be stopped.
Zinc
In 1983, the U.S. government began
minting pennies made of zinc wafers
coated in copper rather than out of pure
copper. As it is not uncommon for young
animals to swallow pennies, zinc toxicity
became recognized.
Other zinc sources include nuts, bolts,
zippers (some metal zippers contain zinc),
and zinc oxide-based skin creams, such as
diaper rash cream and sunscreen. You can
see a penny or other radiodense object of
about the right size on a radiograph, or
there may be a known history of penny
eating. It is important to rule out immunemediated hemolysis as this is a common
condition requiring specific (and very different) treatment.
Clinical Signs
The clinical signs of zinc toxicosis include:
vomiting
diarrhea
red urine
icterus (yellow mucous membranes)
liver failure
kidney failure
anemia
Vomiting and diarrhea generally precede the destruction of red blood cells. How zinc
produces hemolysis is not known. With zinc-containing ointments, usually, only stomach
upset is seen after the ointment is licked, but if the ointment is applied and licked regularly,
full zinc toxicity can develop.
Treatment
If an object possibly made of zinc is seen on an X-ray, it should be removed promptly. This
might involve surgery, endoscopy, or possibly inducing vomiting if the object does not
have sharp edges. Support then becomes crucial. Fluid therapy is important to keep
adequate circulation to the kidneys and help prevent failure. Transfusion may be
necessary to combat anemia, and anti-nausea therapy is justified. Zinc is corrosive to the
stomach so medication to protect the stomach will be needed. Antacids are helpful in
reducing the absorption of zinc, which is enhanced by stomach acid. Research is looking
at methods for binding excess zinc in the circulation similar to the way lead poisoning is
treated.
Once the zinc source is removed, most pets are able to recover within 48-72 hours with
supportive care, but of course, this depends on the severity of the poisoning.

8/4/25, 12:31 PM Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=4951445&ind=599&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951445&pid=19239
b6a348b1-aa75-4708-9ca2-74a861126d25.1754290861
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:31 PM Zinc Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254105&id=4951445&ind=599&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo used with permission by Dr. Tina Miller
Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Stephanie Cruz-Rincon, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Published: January 12, 2021
While the mushrooms in the grocery store
are safe to eat and help make delicious
meals, other types of mushrooms such as
the wild ones along hiking trails or even in
our own backyards are a completely different
story. There are many types of mushrooms
containing different toxins that can make not
only ourselves sick but also our dogs and
cats. Moreover, it’s difficult for people to
distinguish between a safe, edible
mushroom and one that can send their pet to
the emergency room or even lead to death.
Similarly, our furry companions do not have
a built-in sense of what is safe to eat and
what is not. A pet, especially a dog, will
happily chow down on a toxic mushroom
without a care in the world. That is, until you
find them sick on the ground minutes to
hours, and in some cases days, later. It’s
important to note that most mushroom
poisonings occur in dogs as many dogs will
put almost anything into their mouth. As a
result, most of what is known about
mushroom toxicosis (or poisoning) is based
on dogs. However, cats also eat toxic
mushrooms and get sick too.
Depending on the type of mushroom, a number of symptoms can be seen from milder
vomiting and diarrhea to seizures and death. Besides being toxic in and of themselves,
wild mushrooms can also contain bacteria, pesticides and heavy metals that can make
your pet sick. It is essential you closely monitor your pet and restrict any access to
mushrooms whenever you may be around an area with them, as they can grow almost
anywhere. While mushrooms can grow in many different environments from woods to
rocky terrains, their primary growing seasons are spring and early fall. However, in
warmer climates mushrooms can grow year-round and it’s not impossible to find some in
the colder winter months. When it comes to mushrooms and your pet, you do not want to
take any chances so it’s a good idea to be wary year-round.
Wild mushrooms are not the only source of mushroom toxins that can make your pets
sick. Recreational drugs or ‘magic mushrooms’ contain several toxins that can make your
pet ill. As a general rule, it’s a good idea to be vigilant when it comes to what your pet puts
in their mouth; that is especially true in regards to mushrooms.
How to Recognize Signs of Mushroom Ingestion

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Oftentimes when a pet eats a mushroom, you may not be around to witness it or may not
have noticed. After all, it only takes a few seconds to take a bite. In these cases, there are
some clues you can look for. If you are with your dog at the time, signs of chewing,
especially when they don’t have access to their food or treats, could indicate they have
something in their mouth they shouldn’t. Moreover, pieces of the mushroom may be
lingering around their lips or there’s a mushroom near where your dog was with some
chunks missing.
Later signs of potential mushroom ingestion include vomiting and diarrhea. Some pets
vomit up parts of the mushroom which may not be easily recognizable depending on how
long ago they ingested it. Sometimes, though, you may be able to recognize mushroom
chunks in your pet’s vomit. If this is the case, taking pictures as well as collecting the
sample is a good idea so your veterinarian can look at it later.
Others signs of mushroom poisonings include depression or excitation, abdominal pain,
excessive salivation, muscle tremors, seizures, and coma. How your pet will be affected
depends on the specific mushroom they ate and how much of it they had. Your pet can
show signs as relatively mild as vomiting once or have dramatic seizures. Some
mushroom poisonings will affect your pet within minutes to a few hours while others may
take days before signs of illness begin. In the case of very poisonous mushrooms, initial
signs may be so mild they are missed while later signs are life-threatening emergencies.
All of the signs listed are not specific for mushroom poisonings and thus can also be due
to another issue. The wide variability of non-specific signs makes recognizing mushroom
poisonings in animals particularly difficult.
Immediate Steps when Suspecting Mushroom Poisoning
If you are lucky enough to be with your pet at the time of possible mushroom ingestion
and your pet is still chewing, the first thing to do is get them to spit out whatever is in their
mouth. Only do so through safe means such as a command in a trained dog. Depending
on your individual pet and their relationship with you, it may not be safe to try and pry their
mouth open to stop them from swallowing the mushroom. If you are able to get your pet to
spit it out, you should proceed as if they had swallowed it. You may not know if your pet
ingested some of the mushroom so they may still be at risk of a poisoning.
The next step to take is contacting a professional immediately. This may be your pet’s
veterinarian, an animal poison control center, or an emergency veterinary hospital.
Depending on your individual situation you may be asked to bring your cat or dog in to be
seen as soon as possible. Additionally, they may want you to obtain a sample of the
mushroom your pet ate and record details about its environment, if possible. Put the
sample on a white sheet of paper, wrap it in wax paper and place in an airtight paper bag
with a dry paper towel. Refrigerate until it can be examined. Take note of the location the
mushroom was found, including the terrain, location and if possible whether the area is
potentially exposed to pesticides or other chemicals. Make sure to follow the directions
provided by the professional you contacted.
If you did not witness your pet eating a mushroom, you will likely notice when they start
feeling sick. Remember this can look different depending on the mushroom type. Charts 1
and 2 summarize the effects different mushrooms can have on your pet. Some of these
symptoms are general. For example, a dog can vomit for a huge number of reasons.
Keeping track of where you pet roams and whether they have access to mushrooms will
help raise or lower your suspicion of a poisoning. Do not rule out a poisoning just because
you don’t see mushrooms, though. Some mushrooms can be difficult to spot and can
spring up within days so unless you are checking the area carefully, it’s possible your pet
had access to them without you realizing it. If you do notice any of the signs associated
with mushroom poisonings, it’s a good idea to let your veterinarian know. Your pet could
be experiencing the effects of a toxic mushroom or something else could be wrong that
needs to be addressed.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Photo used with permission by Dr. Tina Miller
Common Types of Toxic Mushrooms
There are many different types of toxic
mushrooms. One way they can be grouped
together is by the body system they affect.
For example, there are mushrooms they
affect primarily the central nervous system
and cause related symptoms such as
excitation, depression and seizures. There
are also mushrooms that mainly affect the
gastrointestinal system of your pets, causing
vomiting and diarrhea. These are
summarized in Chart 1. One thing to note is
that while some mushrooms only affect one
body system, there are many that have
effects on multiple and thus a combination of
symptoms can be seen in your pet.
Another useful way to group toxic
mushrooms is by their primary toxin (see
Chart 2). There you will find the typical
symptoms associated with each mushroom
toxin and how they develop in your pet. It’s
important to note that different mushrooms
will affect your pet at different times. For
example, mushrooms with isoxazole
derivatives can affect your pet within minutes while mushrooms with cyclic peptides may
take 10-12 hours after eating to take effect. Moreover, how long your pet’s symptoms last
also depends on the mushroom and its specific toxin as well as how much your pet
ingested. While each mushroom toxin is different, the most toxic ones do not cause acute
signs. Cyclic peptides, for one, are among the deadliest toxins but your pet may not show
signs until about 10-12 hours after ingestion.
Diagnosis
Oftentimes, it is difficult to confirm a diagnosis of mushroom poisoning. If you were able to
obtain a sample of it, species identification is tricky and your veterinarian may need to
send the sample to a trained mycologist for evaluation. Correct evaluation and
identification depend greatly on good preservation of the mushroom. Ways to ensure this
are to quickly give the sample to your veterinarian for evaluation. Other useful steps to
take are getting pictures of the mushroom as soon as you collect it, making sure to take
different angles and include all the different parts because many mushrooms can look
similar from the top. Taking these steps helps whoever is evaluating the mushroom
sample make an accurate identification.
If you do not have a mushroom sample or did not notice your pet ingesting one, other
ways your veterinarian can diagnose your pet is by examining your pet’s vomit and feces,
and checking which symptoms your pet has. Your veterinarian may look for spores in your
pet’s stomach contents under a microscope. The history you report to your veterinarian
may also increase their suspicion of a poisoning. It’s critical to provide a thorough picture
of the situation. For instance, it may be useful for them to know you and your pet went on
a hike through a new area recently, especially if your pet was off-leash at any point.
Oftentimes, however, your veterinarian may not be able to confirm a diagnosis of
mushroom poisoning and instead treat them without it.
Treatment and Prognosis

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 3/7
Unless a confirmed diagnosis of mushroom poisoning and correct identification were
made promptly, your veterinarian will likely treat your pet on a worst-case scenario basis.
Usually this involves decontaminating your pet which includes inducing vomiting if
appropriate, administering activated charcoal to bind the poison from the stomach and
small intestines, and using a drug to speed defecation. In addition, your veterinarian will
likely give your pet supportive treatments such as intravenous fluids, oxygen and other
medications to address their specific symptoms. Usually cats and dogs will receive basic
supportive care regardless of whether they are symptomatic or not as this can help
prevent signs from developing. If the mushroom species is identified or highly suspected,
there are specific medications that can be given. These include liver support medications
for cyclic peptides or the drug atropine in the case of muscarinic mushrooms. Your pet’s
treatment will be largely based on the symptoms they are displaying and what your
veterinarian suspects most.
Depending on how your pet is affected, they may need to be hospitalized for a period of
time. This allows your veterinarian to monitor and respond quickly new symptoms or
worsening of their current condition. It may not be necessary, however, especially with
less severe toxins. Your pet might be stable enough for you to monitor at home.
How well the treatment works out depends heavily on the type of mushroom ingested as
well as how much your pet consumed, your pet’s health, and how quickly they were able
to receive treatment. Many mushrooms are not fatal although your pet could suffer serious
complications if not treated appropriately; other mushrooms live up to their common
names such as the death cap mushroom. Recognizing symptoms early and seeking
immediate care are good ways to help potential life-threatening consequences.
Prevention
It is always better and oftentimes easier to prevent your pet from ingesting a toxic
mushroom than treating them for mushroom toxicosis, not to mention more economic.
Regularly check your backyard for mushrooms before letting your pet out. While not all
mushrooms that grow in your yard will be toxic, it is difficult to differentiate between safe
and toxic Better no mushrooms and safe than a mushroom that may be poisonous.
Another way to prevent mushroom poisonings in your pet is to keep them on a leash
whenever you are out with them. This way you can better monitor them and make sure
they don’t get into any trouble with mushrooms.
Recreational mushrooms or ‘magic mushrooms’ are also toxic to your dogs and cats.
While use of these substances may be legal in some places, you should still be careful
around them. If there are any magic mushrooms in your home, be absolutely sure they
are locked away from pets. While usually not lethal, symptoms associated with these
mushrooms can be less than pleasant for both you and your pet.
There are thousands of species of mushrooms in North America, the majority of which are
not poisonous. Not every mushroom you see growing will cause your pet to get sick, but
you should treat each one as if they could. Better safe than sorry.
Chart 1: General Body Systems Affected
Body System
Affected
Symptoms
Mushroom
types
Prognosis

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 4/7
Hepatotoxic
(liver)
Mild vomiting/diarrhea to
weakness, yellow skin,
abdominal pain and
comatose
Amanitin /
Amanita
species
(some)
Galerina spp.
Lepiota spp.
Often fatal with
irreversible liver failure
Neurotoxic
(nervous
system)
Incoordination,
disorientation weakness,
tremors, seizures,
hallucinations, agitation
and vocalization
Psilocybe
(“magic”
mushrooms)
Good: most animals
recover within 6 hours.
Treatment largely
supportive.
Hydrazines
Gyromitra
species
Prognosis is guarded;
many body systems
affected.
Isoxazole
Generally good: most
animals recover in 24
hours. Treatment is
largely supportive.
Gastrointestinal
Vomiting, diarrhea,
weakness, dehydration
less likely: slow heart rate
and breathing problems
Muscarinic
Generally good with
appropriate treatment.
May require
hospitalization to address
vomiting, diarrhea and
fluid loss
Nephrotoxic
(kidneys)
Increased thirst and
urination, vomiting,
nausea and dehydration
Cortinarius
species
Rare in the US.
Prognosis is guarded
depending on severity of
renal damage
Note: The same mushroom species may affect multiple body systems. Mushrooms are categorized here
by their primary effect; if a mushroom is listed as hepatotoxic it may still affect other body systems but to
a lesser degree relative to its effect on the liver.
Chart 2: Important Specific Toxins and Mushrooms
Toxin(s)
Mushroom
species
/Common
Name
Disease Progression

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Cyclic Peptides
Amanita spp.
Amanita
phalloides
(death cap
mushroom)
Galerina spp.
Lepiota spp.
Symptoms start 10-12 hours after ingestion.
Phase I: bloody diarrhea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, and dehydration. Signs
resolve in a few hours but can last up to 24
hours.
Phase II: Pet seems better as signs
disappear for several hours up to 3 days.
Phase III: Severe liver and kidney
dysfunction with seizures and potential
coma. Bleeding may also occur. Most dogs
die within 3-7 days post ingestion.
Orelline and Orellanine Cortinarius
spp.
Rare in the U.S. Initial symptoms include
vomiting and diarrhea followed by
decreased urine production, vomiting and
depression 3-14 days later. Prognosis is
guarded.
Ibotenic Acid and
Muscimol (Isoxazole
Derivatives)
Tricholoma
spp.
Amanita
muscaria
Amanita
pantherina
Rapid onset of symptoms within a few
minutes to hours. These include abdominal
pain, vomiting, incoordination, and muscle
spasms followed by confusion, drowsiness,
agitation, hallucinations, and seizures. Most
severe signs within 2 -3 hours and usually
resolve within 10-24 hours.
Psilocybin and psilocin
Psilocybe
spp.
Panaeolus
spp.
Copelandia
spp.
Gymnopilus
spp.
Pluteus spp.
Conocybe
spp.
(magic
mushrooms)
Symptoms occur 20-60 minutes post
ingestion and include vomiting,
disorientation, aggression, hallucinations,
tremors, lethargy dilated pupils, increased
body temperature, and increased grooming
in cats. Most pets recover uneventfully
within 6 hours although dilated pupils and
drowsiness may last up to 24 hours.
Monomethylhydrazine
Gyromitra
spp.
(false morsels)
Symptoms start either 6-24 hours post
ingestion or within 2 days. Signs can
include vomiting, diarrhea, depression or
restlessness, and rarely seizures. Most
cases are relatively mild but sometimes
fatal.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 6/7
Muscarine
Inocybe spp.
Clitocybe
spp.
Symptoms occur within 15 minutes to 2
hours of ingestion and include vomiting,
diarrhea, excessive salivation, lacrimation,
urination, nasal discharge, difficulty
breathing, and blurred vision. Can be fatal
but prognosis good with proper treatment.
GI toxins Many different
species
Symptoms occur within 2 hours post
ingestion and include weakness, nausea,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Most cases are mild
and usually resolve without treatment within
1-2 days.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10020259&pid=19239
b6a348b1-aa75-4708-9ca2-74a861126d25.1754290934
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Mushroom Poisoning in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=10020259&ind=601&objTypeID=1007 7/7

Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats
Tina Wismer, DVM, DABVT, DABT
Revised: October 03, 2018
Published: January 15, 2001
The ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center provides a list of plants that have been
reported as having systemic effects on animals and/or intense effects on the
gastrointestinal tract. Please note that the information contained in our plant lists is not
meant to be all-inclusive, but rather a compilation of the most frequently encountered
plants.
Also, be advised that the consumption of any plant material may cause vomiting and
gastrointestinal upset for dogs and cats. Plants listed as either non-toxic, or potentially
toxic with mild GI upset as their symptoms are not expected to be life-threatening to your
pets.
If you believe that your animal is ill or may have ingested a poisonous substance, or if you
have any further questions regarding the information contained in this database, contact
either your local veterinarian or the APCC 24-hour emergency poison hotline at 1-888-
426-4435.
For photographs of individual plants and access to lists of poisonous plants for dogs,
cats, and horses, see the ASPCA's full lists.
Common Plants
Lilies
Members of the Lilium spp. are considered to be highly toxic to cats. While the poisonous
component has not yet been identified, it is clear that with even ingestions of very small
amounts of the plant, severe kidney damage could result.
Cannabis
Ingestion of Cannabis sativa by companion animals can result in depression of the central
nervous system and incoordination, as well as vomiting, diarrhea, drooling, increased
heart rate, and even seizures and coma.
Sago Palm
All parts of Cycas Revoluta are poisonous, but the seeds or "nuts" contain the largest
amount of toxin. The ingestion of just one or two seeds can result in very serious effects,
which include vomiting, diarrhea, depression, seizures, and liver failure.
Tulip/Narcissus bulbs
The bulb portions of Tulipa/Narcissus spp. contain toxins that can cause intense
gastrointestinal irritation, drooling, loss of appetite, depression of the central nervous
system, convulsions, and cardiac abnormalities.
Azalea/Rhododendron
Members of the Rhododenron spp. contain substances known as grayanotoxins, which
can produce vomiting, drooling, diarrhea, weakness, and depression of the central
nervous system in animals. Severe azalea poisoning could ultimately lead to coma and
death from cardiovascular collapse.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=6047984&ind=602&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Oleander
All parts of Nerium oleander are considered to be toxic, as they contain cardiac glycosides
that have the potential to cause serious effects—including gastrointestinal tract irritation,
abnormal heart function, hypothermia, and even death.
Castor Bean
The poisonous principle in Ricinus communis is ricin, a highly toxic protein that can
produce severe abdominal pain, drooling, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive thirst, weakness,
and loss of appetite. Severe cases of poisoning can result in dehydration, muscle
twitching, tremors, seizures, coma, and death.
Cyclamen
Cyclamen species contain cyclamine, but the highest concentration of this toxic
component is typically located in the root portion of the plant. If consumed, cyclamen can
produce significant gastrointestinal irritation, including intense vomiting. Fatalities have
also been reported in some cases.
Kalanchoe
This plant contains components that can produce gastrointestinal irritation, as well as
those that are toxic to the heart and can seriously affect cardiac rhythm and rate.
Yew
Taxus spp. contains a toxic component known as taxine, which causes central nervous
system effects such as trembling, incoordination, and difficulty breathing. It can also cause
significant gastrointestinal irritation and cardiac failure, which can result in death.
Amaryllis
Common garden plants popular around Easter, Amaryllis species contain toxins that can
cause vomiting, depression, diarrhea, abdominal pain, hypersalivation, anorexia, and
tremors.
Autumn Crocus
Ingestion of Colchicum autumnale by pets can result in oral irritation, bloody vomiting,
diarrhea, shock, multi-organ damage and bone marrow suppression.
Chrysanthemum
These popular blooms are part of the Compositae family, which contain pyrethrins that
may produce gastrointestinal upset, including drooling, vomiting, and diarrhea if eaten. In
certain cases, depression and loss of coordination may also develop if enough of any part
of the plant is consumed.
English Ivy
Also called branching ivy, glacier ivy, needlepoint ivy, sweetheart ivy, and California ivy,
Hedera helix contains triterpenoid saponins that, should pets ingest, can result in
vomiting, abdominal pain, hypersalivation, and diarrhea.
Peace Lily (AKA Mauna Loa Peace Lily)
Spathiphyllum contains calcium oxalate crystals that can cause oral irritation, excessive
drooling, vomiting, difficulty in swallowing, and intense burning and irritation of the mouth,
lips, and tongue in pets who ingest.
Pothos
Pothos (both Scindapsus and Epipremnum) belongs to the Araceae family. If chewed or
ingested, this popular household plant can cause significant mechanical irritation and
swelling of the oral tissues and other parts of the gastrointestinal tract.
Schefflera
Schefflera and Brassaia actinophylla contain calcium oxalate crystals that can cause oral
irritation, excessive drooling, vomiting, difficulty in swallowing, and intense burning and
irritation of the mouth, lips, and tongue in pets who ingest them.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=6047984&ind=602&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6047984&pid=19239
b6a348b1-aa75-4708-9ca2-74a861126d25.1754290957
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:32 PM Poisonous Plants for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254106&id=6047984&ind=602&objTypeID=1007 3/3

