Bedlington terriers. Photo courtesy of Depositphotos
Copper Storage Disease in Dogs
Shalini Radhakrishnan, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Published: September 16, 2020
What is copper storage disease?
Copper is an essential nutrient
needed in small amounts by your
pet’s body for energy production,
antioxidant defense, connective
tissue formation, and many other
biological processes. Your pet gets
trace amounts of copper through their
diet and water. Copper is ingested by
your dog, absorbed in the small
intestine, transported to the blood
stream, and eventually settles in the
liver. It is stored in the liver until
needed by other body tissues. The
portion that is not absorbed in the
small intestine is removed through
feces (poop). A small amount of copper is an important nutrient for your dog’s body, but
too much is toxic and damages the tissues. Copper storage disease is excessive amounts
of copper accumulating in the liver due to the inability to get rid of it, or too much in the
diet, or both.
Who gets copper storage disease?
This disease occurs in dogs and is uncommon in cats. Humans have a version called
Wilson’s disease. Certain dog breeds are genetically predisposed or are suspected of
being predisposed to it. The average age of diagnosis is 7 years old, but dogs as young
as 2 have been diagnosed. Both female and male dogs can have this disease.
Common breeds:
 Bedlington terrier
 West Highland white terrier
 Skye terrier
 Doberman pinscher
 Labrador retriever
 Keeshond
American cocker spaniel
Signs
There is no specific sign of copper storage disease. Because there are no definitive signs,
it is usually diagnosed while running bloodwork for other reasons.
 Loss of appetite and weight loss

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Copper Storage Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=9810003&ind=410&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Abdominal pain and vomiting
 Reduced activity level
 Jaundice- yellowing of the whites of the eyes
 Diarrhea
 Increased thirst
 Increased urination (peeing)
Diagnosis
The bloodwork may show values that indicate liver damage, which occurs in copper
storage disease. Blood clotting requires certain factors made by the liver. In some
diseases that damage the liver these factors are reduced, causing a change in blood
clotting (coagulation) tests. The only definite way to diagnose the disease is a biopsy of
the liver tissue. Here are the ways copper storage disease can be diagnosed:
 Physical examination by your veterinarian
 Bloodwork including complete blood count and chemistry
 Blood coagulation test to check liver function
 Urinalysis to look for another cause of the pet’s poor health
 Serum bile acids to access liver function
 Liver biopsy to look for copper in the liver tissue sample
Treatment
There are two goals of copper storage disease treatment: remove the excess copper from
your dog’s body, and prevent future excess copper consumption. Therapeutic copperrestricted diets decrease the amount of trace copper consumption. Your dog will need to
be on this specialty diet lifelong. Chelating agents are medications that bind the excess
copper in your pet’s system and help excrete it in the urine. In some cases, diet alone is
sufficient to control signs, while others may need additional therapy with chelating agents.
Your pet’s health will be monitored during treatment by rechecking bloodwork and liver
biopsies and your veterinarian can help you decide which therapy is best. Left untreated,
your dog’s liver function will be irreversibly damaged. Treating early and continuing with
lifelong therapy has a good prognosis. Lifelong monitoring of your dog’s health by your
veterinarian is important.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9810003&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287491
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:34 AM Copper Storage Disease in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=9810003&ind=410&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 03, 2023
Published: August 06, 2007
In renal insufficiency, phosphorus is not
anyone’s friend. The same phosphorus
that has so many helpful roles in the body
(from transferring biochemical energy to
combining with calcium to form bone),
turns against us in a condition called
renal secondary hyperparathyroidism.
The short version is that the failing kidney
is no longer good at getting rid of excess
phosphorus and phosphorus levels in the
blood begin to rise. The rise in
phosphorus upsets the delicate balance
between calcium and phosphorus and
activates a regulatory hormonal cascade
that attempts to re-establish control.
Without healthy kidney tissue to play its
role in this balance, the body is fighting a
losing battle. Calcium is mobilized from bone to balance the phosphorus but in the end
this only serves to demineralize and weaken the bones and cause calcium phosphate
deposits to form in soft tissues. These mineral deposits are inflammatory and damaging.
The hormones that play roles in the regulation of calcium and phosphorus are parathyroid
hormone and calcitriol (which most of us know as Vitamin D). The story co-stars a
substance called Fibroblast Growth Factor 23. These three materials interact to maintain a
normal and effective blood calcium level without allowing phosphorus levels to run away.
We'll review the story of how this works.
Keeping Calcium Under Control
While our discussion of renal disease largely revolves around phosphorus, the importance
of calcium cannot be underestimated. The movement of calcium ions is what allows our
muscle fibers to contract, not just in our arms and legs but also in our hearts, and
involuntary intestinal and blood vessel muscles as well. Calcium combined with
phosphorus makes up bone; in fact, bone can be considered a storage depot for calcium
when we need some in a pinch. The blood level of calcium is tightly regulated by
hormones within a narrow range as too much calcium is as dangerous as too little.
There are four tiny parathyroid glands around the thyroid gland in the throat area. These
glands produce a biochemical called parathyroid hormone (often abbreviated PTH). PTH
basically raises calcium and activates vitamin D, which further raises calcium. It sounds
like calcium would just continue to rise out of control but there is a safeguard. When active

8/4/25, 11:35 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 1/4
The four parathyroid glands are shown as black dots.
Illustration by MarVistaVet
vitamin D levels get to a certain point, they
shut off PTH production. Calcium levels then
drop down and between these two
hormones, blood calcium is regulated within
a healthy range.
Keeping Phosphorus Under Control
When it comes to phosphorus, PTH and
calcitriol no longer work together. PTH
signals the kidney to dump phosphorus while
calcitriol signals the kidney to save it. In the
normal body, the coordination of these
hormones works out to keep calcium and
phosphorus levels in balance, no matter
what is happening with the blood calcium.
All this goes along swimmingly until the
kidney is too damaged to respond to its
hormonal signals or properly activate
calcitriol.
Parathyroid hormone causes the kidney
to dump phosphorus while vitamin D
causes the kidney to save phosphorus.
What Happens in Kidney Failure?
In early kidney failure, the kidney becomes unable to get rid of phosphorus normally, and
as a result phosphorus levels begin to rise. This activates a substance called Fibroblast
Growth Factor 23 (affectionately known as FGF-23) from the bones. FGF-23 encourages
the kidney to dump more phosphorus and dampen the activation of vitamin D (remember
that vitamin D tells the kidney to save phosphorus). As part of its mission to dampen
vitamin D, FGF-23 also instructs the parathyroid glands to cut back on PTH. All this
vitamin D suppression is all well and good and helps keep the phosphorus levels
reasonable, but pretty soon FGF-23 has dampened both PTH and vitamin D so well that
calcium levels begin to drop.
And this is where calcium-phosphorus Hell breaks loose.
At this point, kidney failure is no longer early. Dropping calcium levels supersede any
FGF-23-mediated suppression of PTH and the parathyroid glands crank up PTH
production to bring calcium levels back up. To meet the body's demand for circulating
calcium, the bones liberate their structural calcium to save the day, but unfortunately doing
this also liberates more phosphorus. This leads to an even higher phosphorus level.
Circulating phosphorus binds the circulating calcium creating crystals that deposit in the
body's soft tissues and generate inflammation. Bones are weakened and replaced with
fibrous tissue. Calcium is depositing uselessly all over the place and the parathyroid
glands must crank even harder to keep calcium levels livable. A metabolic disaster has
occurred at this point.
Making matters worse are other effects of excess parathyroid levels. In high amounts,
nerves cannot conduct electrical impulses properly. Patients become dazed and poorly
responsive.
The goal is to keep the phosphorus level from getting out of control in the first
place. If this is not possible, the goal is to get the phosphorus level back under
control and keep it there.

8/4/25, 11:35 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Drip set for IV fluid. Photo by MarVistaVet
Treatment
How do we Control Phosphorus Levels?
The goal phosphorus level defined by the International Renal Interest Society is between
2.5 and 4.6 mg/dl for earlier renal insufficiency stages and to keep phosphorus levels
under 6 mg/dl for Stage Four (more advanced) patients.
Fluid Therapy
Often simply giving fluids under the skin at
home provides enough extra circulation through
the kidneys for the extra phosphorus to be
excreted normally. Further treatment may not be
needed. Hydrating a damaged kidney effectively
maximizes the kidney's remaining function, and
this may be enough to control phosphorus.
Therapeutic Diet
It is important to remember that ultimately
phosphorus balance is a matter of balancing
phosphorus entering the body with phosphorus
leaving the body. If the kidney is no longer
effective at removing phosphorus, we can
perhaps work on limiting the amount of
phosphorus entering the body. The first step in
doing this is with a therapeutic renal diet. These diets are designed to give the kidney less
work to do, and that includes limiting phosphorus entering the GI tract. After one to two
months on a phosphorus-restricted diet, blood tests will indicate whether or not additional
phosphorus treatment is needed.
Phosphate Binders
These products are given with food to bind phosphorus in the food. The complex of
phosphorus and phosphate binder cannot be absorbed into the body with the result being
reduction of incoming phosphorus. If the pet will not eat food containing the binder, the
binder can be given just before or just after the meal but the binder must be in the GI tract
at the same time as the food or it will not work. There is no point in giving a binder to an
animal that is not eating. Giving the binder before the meal can induce enough stress so
that the pet will not eat so it is better to give the binder after the meal if the binder is not
accepted mixed in the food.
There are a number of phosphate binders available and which one is selected will depend
in part on the concurrent calcium situation. This means that the ionized calcium level (not
the total calcium level) must be measured. Some binders also supplement calcium while
others drop or have no influence on calcium. Some patients require more than one binder
to get their phosphorus value low enough.
Calcitriol
You might think that calcitriol would not be helpful in this situation since it leads the kidney
to retain phosphorus. The good news is that when small enough doses are given, calcitriol
can still act as the off switch for parathyroid hormone without causing the kidney to retain
phosphorus. The amounts needed for this beneficial effect are so small (they are
measured in nanograms) that a compounding pharmacy is needed to custom-make the
product at the proper dose.
Calcitriol cannot be used in patients with elevated blood calcium levels.

8/4/25, 11:35 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Calcitriol cannot be used in patients with phosphorus levels that are already
abnormal. This is a preventive measure more than a treatment.
Renal secondary hyperparathyroidism and its associated high blood phosphate levels are
one of the most common uremic toxin issues in treating kidney disease. Dedication is
required to get phosphate binders into the pet along with food when the pet’s appetite is
weak. Phosphate binders come in powders, liquids, capsules, compounded flavored
chews, and other formats. Consider what approach is likely to work best for your pet but,
remember, the binder only works with food.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952674&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287540
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:35 AM Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952674&ind=409&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and
Cats
Diabetic Cat Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Diabetic Dog Diet
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 03, 2024
Published: February 17, 2010
By now, you know that diabetes mellitus is
about a lack of insulin and a need to
balance insulin given by injection with
dietary nutrients, especially sugars, fats,
and proteins. Regardless of the patient's
species, there are some basic principles
that hold true for the dietary management
of diabetes mellitus. First, the obvious: the
pet must like the food and reliably eat it.
For most diabetic dogs, the excessive
appetite typical of the disease ensures
this but after regulation is achieved and
appetite is more normal, it is important
that the dog eats on a dependable
schedule. Insulin is typically given only
after the pet has eaten, so the food
should taste good, and the pet should
want to eat it. Second, the food must be
of quality and quantity to maintain a good
body condition so that the dog is able to
build muscle and a healthy amount of
body fat. Some diabetic dogs are very
thin, while others are too fat. It is
important to tailor the diet to the individual rather than to adhere to rigid dietary rules.
The ultimate goal is to feed the dog two
similar meals a day, approximately 12 hours
apart, with less than 10% of the total
nutrients for the day coming from treats.
Insulin is given within an hour of eating each
meal and this schedule should be
maintained with as much regularity as
possible.
No diet type has emerged as being optimal
for diabetic dogs. The basic idea is to feed
the dog a food that will maintain a healthy
weight.
Most dogs will not need a diet change, but
this may be a good time to re-evaluate your feeding strategy. Here are some
considerations:
Treats

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952921&ind=411&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Basically, minimize them.
The regulation of diabetes mellitus depends on the balance between the carbohydrates
going in and the insulin allowing them to be stored. Many people like to offer the dog a
treat after insulin injections or after blood sampling. This can add a surprising amount of
calories, and it is important to realize that every treat works against the insulin injections
you are giving. If treats are felt to be necessary it will be important to determine how many
calories are being added to the daily intake this way and adjust the meal amount
accordingly. Ideally, treats are small and low in carbohydrates. High-fiber vegetable bits
usually work. Baby carrots should fit the bill. Similar vegetables are also good choices.
Fiber
These large bowel bacteria break down this type of
fiber to feed not only themselves but also to feed
the animal's colon cells, improve bowel circulation,
and generally contribute to bowel health. The
problem is that this process leads to a higher postmeal sugar surge in the bloodstream, which is
exactly what we do not want.
Insoluble fibers, such as cellulose, bulk up the stool,
which can stimulate the colon. Insoluble fiber is not
digested by the colon bacteria and does not offer
calories to the pet that has consumed it. This is helpful for weight loss programs, as the
indigestible fiber contributes to a feeling of fullness without contributing calories.
After a meal, the starches and sugars taken in with the food lead to a postprandial surge
in blood sugar levels. Since the diabetic dog is dealing with runaway blood glucose levels
24 hours a day, meals, as necessary as they are, raise blood sugar even further. Our goal
with dietary therapy is to blunt this effect. Insoluble fiber in the diet helps accomplish this
by slowing the digestion and transit of the food in the gut. Too much insoluble fiber,
however, will give the pet a false sense of being full and reduce appetite, which may not
be what we want if the pet is underweight. So what are we looking for in a food? If the dog
is overweight, we probably want a higher fiber diet (say greater than 15 percent of the dry
matter as fiber) but for a more average dog, we want a moderate amount of fiber (5-15
percent of the dry matter). The fiber content noted in the guaranteed analysis will likely not
specify if the fiber is soluble or insoluble; you will need to check the ingredient list to be
sure.
HOW TO CALCULATE FIBER CONTENT IN FOOD ON A DRY MATTER BASIS
To calculate the percentage of fiber in a diet on a dry matter basis, look for the “crude
fiber” and the “moisture content” amounts on the guaranteed analysis on the food
label.
SAMPLE GUARANTEED ANALYSIS
Crude Protein (min).......8%
Crude Fat (min).........6%
Crude Fiber (max).........1.0%
Moisture (max).........78%
The moisture content is the amount of water in the food on an "as fed" basis
expressed as a percent (what percent of the food you are feeding is actually just
water). Take the moisture content and subtract from 100 to get the dry matter content
of the food (the part of the food that is actually food and not water). For example, if
the moisture content is 78% (typical canned food) then the dry matter is 22%.

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952921&ind=411&objTypeID=1007 2/4
Now take the crude fiber value from the guaranteed analysis on the label and divide
by the percent of dry matter. For example, crude fiber on the label is 1%, and
moisture content is 78%. This means dry matter is 22% and 1 divided by 22 = 0.045
or 4.5%. Our hypothetical canned food is 1% fiber as fed but 4.5% on a dry matter
basis. When comparing foods, always compare on a dry matter basis so as to
compare "apples to apples".
The above diet is way too low in fiber for an overweight dog and probably a little light
on fiber for a dog of normal weight or thin dog.
High Digestibility Diets: Probably not the Best Thing
There are numerous diets on the market designed for dogs with sensitive stomachs.
These foods typically are designed for easy digestion and absorption. While this is helpful
to the dog with digestive issues, easy digestion and absorption amounts to higher blood
glucose levels after eating. This is probably not the best thing for a diabetic dog.
Similarly, soft moist foods are preserved and flavored with sugars. These, as you might
guess, raise postprandial blood sugar readily and are poor choices. These diets are not as
common as they once were and should not be confused with canned foods.
Low Fat
A common issue that accompanies diabetes mellitus is elevated triglycerides (fats) in the
bloodstream. In humans, this is the doorway to vascular disease, cholesterol deposits,
heart disease, and stroke. Dogs do not generally have to contend with these issues but
dietary fat becomes more relevant if the dog is one of the 30% for whom pancreatitis is
believed to have damaged the pancreas and led to diabetes in the first place. If
pancreatitis is in play or if the patients circulating triglyceride level is high, then fat
restriction is going to be a must. Further, L-carnitine supplementation may also be of
benefit as this nutrient is helpful in fat transport and metabolism. Fat-restricted diets may
not be a good idea for very thin diabetic dogs, however.
Other Concepts
As long as the diet is consistent, it is generally possible to work with it to achieve diabetic
regulation. Here are some additional tips:
If the dog has an additional medical problem that requires a specific diet in its
management, then this trumps the suggestions for diabetic management.
As long as a reputable food that has passed AAFCO feeding trials is being fed,
it should not be necessary to add nutritional supplements.
Ideally, a brand of food with a fixed formula is preferred to one with an open
formula. Foods with an open formula stick to their prioritized ingredient list on
the label and to the guaranteed analysis minimums and maximums, but the
exact ingredient amounts are not fixed. A fixed formula food uses specific
amounts of each ingredient every time in every lot. In general, non-prescription
diets are open-formula diets.
Your veterinarian can help you choose the most appropriate food for your diabetic dog.
There are several commercial diets made just for this purpose or you may elect to find
one on your own. You can also contact a commercial pet nutrition service for further help.
Ask your veterinarian if you need assistance.
Related resources

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952921&ind=411&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Glargine (Lantus) - July 29, 2025
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - January 28, 2025
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952921&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287568
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Dog Diet - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952921&ind=411&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs
Diabetic Cat Diet
Diabetic Dog Diet
Glargine (Lantus) and Detemir
(Levemir) Insulin
Insulin Administration in Cats
Insulin Administration in Dogs
Insulin Alternatives
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in
Dogs and Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for
Diabetic Cats
Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 28, 2025
Published: February 09, 2010
Ketoacidosis is one of the most extreme
complications of diabetes mellitus.
Unfortunately, most cases of ketoacidosis
are in patients that were not previously
known to be diabetic, so the owner (and
pet) must deal with two serious
diagnoses: one acutely life-threatening
and expensive and the other requiring
ongoing commitment and daily treatment.
The diabetic patient has an insulin
deficiency. To recap, there is a huge
amount of glucose in the bloodstream, but
without insulin, none of it can get inside
the cells that need it. It just circulates
around uselessly. The tissues, some of
which require glucose as their only food,
are starving. Add to this some sort of
second stressful condition, such as
infection or pancreatitis, and the tissue
demand for food/fuel increases. The
tissues, including the brain, become
especially desperate, and the body begins
to break down fat frantically in order to liberate the small amount of carbohydrates (which
can convert to glucose) contained therein.
Fat is able to convert to a biochemical called a
ketone body. Ketone bodies can be used as an
alternative fuel source by tissues that require
glucose (brain, red blood cells, etc.). This will save
the day in the short term but the problem is that
ketone bodies do not "burn clean." When ketone
bodies are burned, pH and electrolyte imbalances
ensue. These imbalances create dehydration, which
in turn creates more pH and electrolyte imbalances.
A metabolic disaster results if this state of glucose
desperation persists.
Most patients in diabetic ketoacidosis are lethargic, depressed, and will not eat. They are
dehydrated and frequently nauseated. Blood glucose is extremely high, and ketones can
be detected in the urine. The goal is to gradually correct all the imbalances, get the patient
out of the extreme fat-burning state, and establish some sort of initial regulation of
diabetes.

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952917&ind=412&objTypeID=1007 1/3
The prognosis is generally fair as long as the complicating disease (the disease that is
happening on top of diabetes mellitus) can be resolved. That said, round-the-clock
monitoring of electrolytes and blood sugars is needed to safely guide the patient through
the crisis, and this kind of care has a significant expense. Ketoacidosis involves potential
disasters in potassium, phosphorus, pH, blood sugar, and sodium. All of these parameters
must be controlled. The goal is to convert the complicated diabetic patient into an
uncomplicated diabetic patient, but the patient will still be diabetic at the end of treatment.
What to Expect in the Hospital
The sooner the crisis is recognized, the faster treatment can be started. Because
electrolytes can change moment by moment, blood testing is necessary throughout the
day to keep track and keep the imbalances corrected. A facility that offers 24-hour care is
ideal. Aside from the monitoring required to manage the ketoacidosis, testing to determine
the precipitating stress is necessary as well.
In dogs, the most common precipitating/concurrent conditions are pancreatitis, urinary
tract infection, and Cushing's disease. In cats, precipitating/concurrent conditions
include hepatic lipidosis, kidney infection, pancreatitis, and cholangiohepatitis.
Intravenous Fluids
Fluid therapy is the key to treatment. The patient is invariably dehydrated from the high
circulating blood sugar levels, which cause excess fluid loss in urine, as well as from
vomiting or diarrhea, which are common in ketoacidosis. Aside from simply providing
fluids, the IV fluid provides a vehicle by which other metabolic derangements can be
repaired.
Insulin
Blood sugar must be controlled if treatment is to be successful but to prevent brain
damage, blood sugar levels must be dropped slowly. To achieve this, “regular insulin”
(typically Humulin R®) is used, given either as multiple intramuscular injections or as a
continuous drip. This type of insulin is short-acting and wears off quickly, which allows it to
provide small adjustments. It is not until the patient is eating and nausea has been
controlled that maintenance insulins can be started.
Potassium
Patients in ketoacidosis are greatly depleted in potassium. While insulin is needed to
control blood sugar, insulin worsens the problem by driving potassium into the body’s cells
and out of the bloodstream. Typically, high amounts of potassium must be supplemented
in the intravenous fluid solution.
Phosphorus
Low levels of phosphorus also accompany diabetic ketoacidosis. If levels drop too low, the
patient’s red blood cells will begin to burst and be unable to maintain integrity. Phosphorus
is also supplemented through the intravenous fluid solution.
Blood pH
The term ketoacidosis implies that the blood pH is overly acidic. If the situation is severe
enough, sodium bicarbonate must be added to the intravenous therapy.
All these aspects require regular monitoring, which means lab work perhaps four times
daily or more. Patients in diabetic ketoacidosis require close monitoring and intensive
care.
When urine dipsticks no longer test positive for ketones and the patient is eating well and
in good spirits, he or she is able to go home and be managed as a regular diabetic. Diet,
monitoring, insulin etc. will be on-going concerns. Ideally, Ketostix, obtainable from any

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952917&ind=412&objTypeID=1007 2/3
drug store, will be used at home to monitor for ketones to head off problems before they
become extreme in the future.
It could take as long as a week to induce enough regulation to control the ketone situation
and get the patient back to an uncomplicated diabetic state. Intensive care is needed.
Assuming the secondary condition can be stabilized and the ketoacidosis state is
reversed, the patient must contend with diabetic regulation just like any other newly
diagnosed diabetic patient. With good vigilance and prompt medical attention, poor
regulation/undiagnosed diabetes can be recognized before complications such as this
arise.
Related resources
Glargine (Lantus) - July 29, 2025
Diabetic Dog Diet - July 3, 2024
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Cats - June 12, 2024
Glipizide (Glucotrol) - April 9, 2024
Insulin Administration in Dogs - March 31, 2024
Diabetic Cat Diet - November 4, 2023
Hard to Regulate Diabetic Dogs - September 26, 2023
Cataracts in Diabetic Dogs - August 17, 2023
Monitoring Glucose Regulation in Dogs and Cats - June 18, 2023
Oral Diabetic Therapies - April 24, 2023
Diabetes Mellitus: Introduction - April 24, 2023
Insulin Administration in Cats - February 18, 2021
Home Testing of Blood Glucose for Diabetic Cats - November 24, 2014
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952917&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287594
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:36 AM Diabetic Ketoacidosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952917&ind=412&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo by VIN
Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA)
Revised: January 22, 2024
Published: March 05, 2019
Can pet diets cause heart problems?
Yes. Thirty years ago, veterinarians
recognized deficiency of an amino acid
(taurine) as the most common cause of
dilated cardiomyopathy in cats. Cats are
unable to make their taurine (just like
people can’t make their own vitamin C) and
must ingest it to stay healthy. Taurine is
plentiful in most animal tissues.
Being carnivores, domestic, feral, and wild
cats that hunt for food get adequate
amounts of taurine from their diet.
However, some commercial cat foods at
that time contained insufficient amounts of
taurine causing dilated cardiomyopathy
and other health issues. This discovery resulted in pet food companies adding more
taurine to their manufactured foods. Subsequently, taurine-associated dilated
cardiomyopathy in cats has all but disappeared. It is occasionally diagnosed when cat
owners feed unbalanced diets (e.g., boiled poultry or vegetarian diets).
A few years later, certain breeds of dogs were found to also have dilated cardiomyopathy
in association with taurine deficiency. This was unexpected because dogs, unlike cats,
can synthesize taurine from other sulfur-containing amino acids in their food.
Investigators suspected that these breeds were unable to synthesize taurine in amounts
needed to replace losses. Taurine is typically efficiently recycled in the small intestine, but
various dietary factors can affect this process. When supplemented with high doses of
taurine, these dogs resolved their cardiomyopathy in many cases.
Since that time, specific categories of diets have been sporadically linked to heart
disease. One group of Newfoundlands that were fed a commercial lamb-and-rice diet
developed taurine deficiency and reversible cardiomyopathy. Other dogs have also been
found to have a taurine deficiency when fed similar lamb-and-rice diets. Occasionally,
dogs fed vegan or vegetarian diets have been taurine deficient and suffer heart disease.
Most recently, Golden Retrievers have been identified as having a taurine-deficiency
associated cardiomyopathy.
Is diet-associated cardiomyopathy caused by taurine deficiency?
The evidence suggests that the recent “outbreak” of cardiomyopathy in dogs is likely not
primarily related to taurine deficiency. Blood assays of taurine in many affected dogs
show normal taurine concentrations. The observations suggesting this condition is related
to taurine deficiency originate from populations where several of the affected dogs were

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=8989590&ind=413&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Golden Retrievers (who are a special case, as described above). It is hypothesized by
some that being taurine deficient makes these dogs more susceptible to whatever is
causing the diet-associated cardiomyopathy. Because of concerns from some veterinary
researchers about the methods used to assess taurine status in the studied populations
with few or no Golden Retrievers, we cannot completely rule out the role of taurine
deficiency at this time in all breeds. Time will tell.
If it’s not taurine, what is the cause?
We don’t know. The only common link that investigators have observed is “grain-free”
diets that use lentils and other legumes (peas) as the “base ingredient.” There are many
theories, but no definitive answers explaining how these diets cause cardiomyopathy.
There is also a lack of reporting and consistent data collection on diet-related heart issues
in pets. Cardiomyopathy is most likely caused by a combination of genetics, other medical
conditions, and diet.
Are all “limited ingredient” or “grain free” diets at fault?
Some dogs are prescribed diets to diagnose and treat allergies (skin or gastrointestinal
diseases). Such diets might include a limited number of uncommon ingredients, such as
salmon, kangaroo, potatoes, peas, etc. At this point, no therapeutic diets, manufactured
by the major pet food manufacturers (Hills, Purina, Royal Canin), have been associated
with cases of diet-associated cardiomyopathy.
There is no medical or nutritional indication for “grain free” although some veterinary
therapeutic diets recommended to diagnose and treat allergies are also grain free. They
are chosen because the ingredients happen to be novel for the specific patient, but they
are not used because they lack grains per se. Grain free is simply a marketing category
and there is no specific benefit.
In recent years, canine diets containing pulses, which are the dried seeds of foods like
chickpeas, lentils, beans, and dry peas, have been linked to diet-associated
cardiomyopathy versus just the presence or absence of grains (corn, rice, and wheat).
What should I do if my dog eats a grain-free legume-based or other implicated diet?
First, check the ingredient label. If peas or lentils are the main ingredient (or main
carbohydrate source), consider changing to a diet that contains grains.
Second, if you are reluctant to change the diet, consult your veterinarian about having a
cardiac ultrasound (echocardiogram) to see if your dog has evidence of cardiomyopathy.
If your dog is found to be affected, even if it’s showing no clinical signs, change the diet to
a grain-based commercial diet. Most nutritionists recommend using the WSAVA guidelines
for the selection of commercial diets.
Third, if you have a dog that is “at risk” for taurine deficiency (American Cocker Spaniel,
Golden Retriever, Newfoundland, Dalmatian) and eating an implicated diet, have the
blood taurine levels checked. Measure both whole blood and plasma collected at the
same time to enable the most accurate interpretation of your dog’s taurine status. If those
are low, determine if the dog has cardiomyopathy with a cardiac ultrasound, change the
diet, and supplement taurine as directed by your veterinarian.
The more data collected, the more likely researchers will be able to resolve whether
taurine deficiency plays a primary or secondary role in causing this diet-associated
cardiomyopathy.
Your veterinarian or veterinary cardiologist is the one best able to advise you about the
most appropriate course of action for your dog.
What about cats?

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=8989590&ind=413&objTypeID=1007 2/3
A few cat cases have been reported to the FDA, but the numbers are too small to say
anything definitive. This appears to be primarily a dog problem.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8989590&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287646
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Diets and Heart Disease in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=8989590&ind=413&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Canine Food
Allergy Lesions
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Graphic by Mar
VistaVet
Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 26, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
Your Pet's Itchy Skin
Itchy skin in dogs and cats is often more than just a minor
annoyance. Red, oozing bald patches, rashes, and large expanses
of hair loss are unfortunate markers of very real discomfort. The
cause should be determined.
Food allergy is one of the itchiest conditions for cats and dogs.
Animals eat a variety of processed food proteins, flavorings, and
colorings that are further processed inside their bodies. Proteins
may be combined or changed into substances recognized by the
immune system as foreign invaders to be attacked. The resulting
inflammation may target the GI tract or other organ systems, but in dogs
and cats, the skin is frequently included in this immunologic activity.
Cats itch around the face or neck, which produces scabs and hair loss. In
dogs, signs include facial itching, foot or limb chewing, itchy anal area, and
recurrent ear infections.
Many people erroneously assume itching due to food allergy requires a
recent diet change of some sort. In fact, the opposite is true.
Food allergies require time to develop; most animals have been eating the
offending food for years with no trouble.
  
What Kind of Allergy?
Diagnosing and treating allergic skin disease and its secondary infections make up a large
proportion of cases seen in small animal practice. Pets can be allergic to insect bites
(fleas are not inherently itchy unless the pet is allergic to flea bites), airborne proteins
(such as molds, pollens, and dust mite parts), or foods. Pets can and often do have
multiple allergies, adding together to make them itchy. The skin infections that come from
scratching perpetuate the itching. To solve the problem, the infection must be cleared up
and the offending allergen(s) removed from the pet's world.
There is controversy about how common food allergy is in dogs and cats. Some experts
feel it is relatively rare, while others feel is much more common than we realize. It is hard
to tell because there is no simple test for food allergy, and the skin lesion distribution is
difficult to distinguish from that of airborne allergy, which is frequently concurrent in the
same patient.
So what are our clues that a pet has a food allergy? There are several hints:

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4951526&ind=414&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Courtesy Dr. Cathy Wilkie
The itching is not seasonal (this is hard to tell in areas that do not freeze during
winter).
Itching started when the pet was less than six months of age or greater than
five to six years of age.
No response to treatment for sarcoptic mange (a condition with a similar itchy
skin pattern).
Corticosteroids have not helped manage the itching. Corticosteroids may or
may not work on food allergy itching but they almost always work for other
allergies.
There are accompanying intestinal signs like vomiting or diarrhea. These are
seen in 30 percent of food allergic pets.
The lesion distribution is compatible with food allergy, especially if an itchy anal
area and/or recurrent ear infections are involved.
Any of the above findings or observations warrant the pursuit of food allergy.
Please note that several of the above criteria relate to what you observe at home. Trouble
results when the veterinarian must speak to different family members about the pet and
there is disagreement in their observations. It is best to have one person, preferably the
one who has the most contact with the pet, be the spokesperson and make the relevant
judgments.
The Flea Factor
Some animals have many allergies. It would not
be particularly unusual for a pet to have a food
allergy and another type of allergy at the same
time.
Ensure immaculate flea control for any itchy pet!
For more information on the current proliferation
of flea products, see a product comparison chart
so you can pick the best product for your
situation. Remember, all dogs and cats in the
home must be treated.
What about Blood/Hair/Saliva Tests for Food
Allergy?
The short answer is not to waste money on these
tests. Blood tests for allergy can detect
antibodies against certain food proteins, but this
does not necessarily mean the pet has an allergy. It may mean nothing more than the pet
has eaten that type of protein before. Furthermore, the pet's body may alter a food protein
during digestion, and it is the altered protein that generates the allergy. There is no
predicting how a protein could be altered and thus no test can be devised for altered
proteins. Laboratory tests are simply not valid for determining if a pet has an allergy to a
certain type of food.
Hypoallergenic Diet Trial
To determine whether or not a food allergy or intolerance is causing the skin problem, a
hypoallergenic diet is fed for a set period. If the pet recovers, the original diet is fed for up
to two weeks to see if itching resumes. (Actually, exposure to an allergen generally leads
to itching within 12 hours, but it takes two weeks to be completely sure.)

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4951526&ind=414&objTypeID=1007 2/5
If we see recovery with the test diet and itch with the original diet, then food allergy is
diagnosed, and the pet is returned to either the test diet or another appropriate
commercial food indefinitely.
There is no other way to determine if a pet has a food allergy. Blood tests are not useful.
Before reviewing diet strategies for this process, here are some additional concerns:
The diet must be strict (meaning the pet should not have any other protein
sources besides the test protein). This includes rawhides and chew toys,
flavored chewable medications (these will need to be changed for unflavored
tablets) and vitamins, and treats.
All family members must be on board with the trial. No one should be giving the
pet other foods or treats when no one else is looking.
It is probably best for all animals in the house to be fed the test protein so as
not to have food-sharing issues.
Itching must be managed during the trial in a way that the results of the trial are
not foiled.
Diet trials often span a season change period. If a dog has a pollen allergy and
winter comes during the period of the diet trial, it may appear that the diet
worked when, in fact, the seasons simply changed. This is why a diet challenge
is important at the end, even if the pet is doing well.
The diet trial will take eight weeks. Most animals will respond in three to four
weeks, but to be sure, you will need to feed the test diet for two months.
What Is a Good Hypoallergenic Diet?
There are two approaches to test diets: novel protein and hydrolyzed protein. Traditionally,
a novel protein is used. This is a diet with a single protein source that the patient has
never eaten before. It typically takes years to become allergic to a food protein so the
patient should not be allergic to something new.
Fortunately, many pet food companies have discerned the need for diets using unusual
protein and carbohydrate sources with a minimum of additives. Foods can be obtained
based on venison and potato, fish and potato, egg and rice, duck and pea, and even
kangaroo. Diets used for allergy trials must contain one protein and one carbohydrate
source, and neither can be something the pet has had before. Recently, several diets that
include duck, venison, and so on have been released to the general market. Be aware of
foods that contain these ingredients because these ingredients will not be useable for
future diet trials if they are ever used in the pet's regular food.
It is important that no unnecessary medications are given during the diet trial. No edible
chew toys (such as rawhides or bones) should be given. Treats must be based on the
same food sources as the test diet. (Beware of rice cakes, though, as wheat is commonly
used as a filler.) Chewable heartworm preventives should be replaced with tablets or
topicals.
Over-the-Counter Food? Therapeutic Diet? Home Cooked?
Recently several pet food companies have released single protein diets for over-thecounter sales. These tend to cost less than the therapeutic diets available from your
veterinarian's office directly. While these diets are attractive, they are probably not a good
choice for an actual diet trial. Immunological tests on these foods found that many of them
contain additional proteins (probable contaminants from prior batches in the pet food
factory). These impurities could defeat a diet trial which is hard enough to perform without
such issues. The therapeutic diets did not have these contaminants.

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4951526&ind=414&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Home cooking is a fine alternative to commercially prepared foods for the diet trial. The
problem is that the test diets will most likely not be balanced but for the 2 months or so of
testing, this should not be a problem. Home cooking is a bit of an inconvenience, but for
the right person, it is a good choice. Ideally, a nutritionist should be involved in designing
the diet. Recipes for appropriate diets can be purchased through BalanceIt,
Petdiets.com or by any nutritionist listed at the American College of Veterinary Nutrition
website.
The Hydrolyzed Protein Method
Several therapeutic diets are made from hydrolyzed proteins. This means that a
conventional protein source is used but the protein is broken down into molecules too
small to excite the immune system. There are various hydrolyzed diets on the market;
discuss with your veterinarian which is best for your pet.
Trial Diet Timeframe
Studies have shown that 80 percent of dogs will have shown a response by 4 to 6 weeks
on the diet, but by extending the diet to 8 weeks, 90 percent will respond. The Labrador
retriever and cocker spaniel appear to require longer trials. Most veterinary dermatologists
recommend 8 to 12 weeks, which is a long time to be strict on the diet, but that is the only
way to detect food allergic dogs.
Most commercial diets used in food allergy trials have a
100 percent guarantee. This means that if your pet
doesn’t like the food, the food can be returned for a
complete refund, even if the bag is opened. This is
especially helpful for feline patients, as cats are famous
for being choosy about what they are willing to eat.
What To Do if the Diet Is Successful?
To confirm food allergy, return to the original food; itching
generally resumes within 14 days if food allergy was truly
the reason for the itchy skin. Many people do not want to
take a chance of returning to itching if the patient is doing well; it is not unreasonable to
simply stay with the test diet if the pet remains free of symptoms. Often it is difficult to
remember 10 to 12 weeks later how itchy the dog used to be before the diet trial. The diet
challenge helps make it more obvious whether the diet trial has worked or not.
It is possible to more specifically determine the identity of the offending foods after the pet
is well. To do this, a pure protein source (such as cooked chicken, tofu, wheat flour, or any
other single food) is added to the test diet with each feeding. If the pet begins to itch
within two weeks, then that protein source represents one of the pet's allergens. Return to
the test diet until the itching stops, and try another pure protein source. If no itching results
after two weeks of feeding a test protein, the pet is not allergic to this protein.
What To Do if the Diet Is Unsuccessful?
Assuming secondary skin infections have been controlled, an unsuccessful food trial is
strongly suggestive that an inhalant allergy is a primary problem, but some other
considerations should at least be mentioned:
Are you certain that the dog received no other food or substances orally during
the trial?
Was sarcoptic mange ruled out?
Your pet may require a longer diet trial. Are you certain regarding the factor that
pointed toward the food allergy?

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4951526&ind=414&objTypeID=1007 4/5
If your pet has not been biopsied, now may be a good time. If an inhalant allergy has risen
to the top of the list, symptomatic relief either via medication, baths with specific
shampoos, or allergy shots will likely be necessary. Chronic itchiness can be extremely
uncomfortable and prompt relief is our goal as well as yours.
Information on itch relief.
Information on inhalant allergy.
Information on sarcoptic mange.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951526&pid=19239
db4229ee-83d0-4647-b8b9-5aa2a7d1adba.1754287675
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:37 AM Food Allergies in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4951526&ind=414&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats
Phyllis DeGioia, Veterinary Partner Editor; Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: September 15, 2023
Published: May 05, 2003
Many people would like to feed home-cooked or raw diets to their dogs and cats, however,
well-balanced home-cooked or raw diets are often hard for owners to design and make.
To complicate matters, there is much disagreement on what diet is best for pets, as “one
size does not fit all”.
We suggest that people wishing to feed one of these diets first consult with their
veterinarian and discuss the pet’s specific health situation. Doing significant research (see
the links below) and understanding the health risks to your pets and yourself before
embarking on this is very important.
Your veterinarian may refer you to a veterinary
nutritionist (specialist). A veterinary nutritionist
can help you understand diet options based on
your pet's specific health needs, and design a
nutritionally complete diet (all the needed
calories, protein, fat, carbohydrates, vitamins,
minerals, etc.) for your pet. Visit this site to
locate a veterinary nutritionist near you.
Overall, the more you know before you start, the
better the nutrition and outcome will be.
Other resources:
See the American Veterinary Medical Association's position on a raw food diet.
CDC - Raw Pet Food
Dietary Supplements Warnings and Safety Information
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6048124&pid=19239
dfd42278-ac87-4d83-b4b5-c54feb74ad70.1754287699
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:39 AM Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=6048124&ind=415&objTypeID=1007 1/2

8/4/25, 11:39 AM Home Cooked or Raw Diets for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=6048124&ind=415&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Photo Courtesy Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 26, 2021
Published: November 21, 2005
When the Results say Low Blood Calcium
Calcium is a mineral we have all heard about as we
have been told to drink milk for adequate calcium
since we were children. Women are encouraged to
take calcium supplements, not just in pregnancy but
virtually throughout adulthood in hope of staving off
osteoporosis. Calcium is not only important as a
component of bone; it is also involved in the
contraction of all muscle tissue including the skeletal
muscles that move our limbs voluntarily, the
involuntary muscles that move our intestinal
contents from one end to the other, and our heart
muscle that beats regularly and tirelessly throughout
life.
There's more.
Calcium is used as a messenger to activate
enzymes and regulate all sorts of body functions.
Calcium is such a crucial component of our
biochemistry that virtually any complete blood panel,
whether human or veterinary will include a
measurement of calcium. Our bodies go to
tremendous lengths to regulate our blood calcium levels within a narrow range. We need
a storage source to draw upon for when we need more circulating calcium as well as a
system to unload the excess.
How Calcium is Organized in our Bodies
Calcium exists in several states in our bodies depending on whether it is being used or
stored. Ionized calcium is circulating free in the bloodstream and is active or ready to be
used in one of the numerous body functions requiring calcium. The amount of ionized
calcium in the blood is tightly regulated. Too much is dangerous. Too low is dangerous.
About 50 percent of blood calcium is ionized calcium.
Bound calcium is also circulating in the bloodstream but it is not floating around freely. It is
being carried by molecules of albumin (a blood protein whose job is to transport
substances that don't freely dissolve in blood) or it is complexed with other ions. About 40
percent of blood calcium is bound (i.e. carried by albumin or complexed with another ion).
Ionized calcium and bound calcium added together are called total calcium. This value is
reported on most blood chemistry panels. Total calcium refers to the total calcium in the
bloodstream, not the total calcium in the body.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952400&ind=416&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Calcium is also stored in the minerals of bone. We do not usually think of bone as more
than just scaffolding but living bone is a surprisingly active tissue. One of its functions is to
store calcium and when calcium is needed, it can be mobilized from the bone. Normally
there is plenty of calcium and such mobilization does not significantly weaken the bone
structure but if excess calcium is mobilized, bone can be depleted and softened.
Adjusting Calcium Levels
When the body needs to raise blood ionized calcium levels, the sources it may draw from
are the bones (where calcium is stored as mineral), and the intestine (where the calcium
we eat enters our bodies). We can regulate how much dietary calcium is allowed to enter
from the GI tract. We can cause our bones to relinquish stored calcium quickly or slowly
as our needs dictate.
When we want to drop the ionized calcium level, our kidneys are able to remove
circulating calcium, placing it in our urine so that it can be happily flushed away.
These processes are controlled by two hormones: parathyroid hormone (affectionately
called PTH) and calcitriol (affectionately known as vitamin D). Calcitriol acts to enhance
calcium absorption into the body from the intestine, promote release of calcium from
bone, and cause the kidney to avoid dumping calcium. This adds up to higher blood
ionized calcium. PTH also acts to mobilize bone calcium (and phosphorus with it) and to
shut off renal calcium dumping. This also adds up to more blood ionized calcium. (The
phosphorus is attached to calcium in bone. There is no way to release the calcium from
bone without also releasing phosphorus. To get rid of the excess phosphorus, PTH
enhances the kidney's ability to dump phosphorus into the urine.)
What keeps calcium from rising higher and higher? Calcitriol shuts off PTH production in
the parathyroid glands. PTH is necessary for activation of vitamin D. Essentially these two
hormones shut each other off.
The sequence of events might be this: blood ionized calcium begins to drop. The
parathyroid glands sense this and release PTH. Ionized calcium begins to rise. When PTH
levels are high enough, vitamin D is activated.
Ionized calcium begins to rise more. When enough vitamin D has been activated, the
parathyroid glands shut off PTH production.
When PTH levels are low enough, vitamin D activation ceases and calcium levels drop
again.
A number of conditions can interfere with the above system: Vitamin D deficiency, kidney
disease, too many puppies nursing for a small mother dog, and more. We will review the
classic causes in a moment but first, the symptoms.
Without calcium, muscle contraction becomes abnormal and the nervous system more
excitable. Seizures (called hypocalcemic tetany) can result. This type of seizure occurs
when the calcium level drops below 6 mg/dl (1.50 mmol/L) and in dogs (but not cats) and
seems to be associated with exercise during the hypocalcemia state. Other symptoms
include: nervousness, disorientation, drunken walk, fever, weak pulses, excessive panting,
muscle tension, twitches and tremors. Cats tend to show more listlessness than dogs and
also tend to raise their third eyelids. Painful muscle cramping occurs which can lead a pet
to become aggressive. If calcium levels drop to 4 mg/dl (1.00 mmol/L) or below, death
generally results.
How Might a Pet Come to Have Hypocalcemia?
When a small mother dog attempts to nurse too large a litter, she can find herself depleted
in calcium. She will show the typical symptoms as described and the diagnosis is usually
pretty clear as the patient is a female dog nursing a litter. Blood tests will confirm the
diagnosis; treatment involves an injection of calcium followed by oral calcium

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952400&ind=416&objTypeID=1007 2/5
supplements. It should be noted that attempting to prevent this condition with oral calcium
supplements frequently backfires as it suppresses the mother dog's natural ability to
mobilize calcium by fooling her body into thinking there is plenty. If there really isn't plenty,
she will not be hormonally prepared to liberate more.
Chronic Renal Failure
When the kidneys become too damaged to respond to the hormones described above,
calcium can end up either high or low depending on a number of factors. There is
tendency towards high phosphorus levels in this situation and proper management will
depend on keeping the phosphorus levels under control. Basic blood and urine testing will
reveal the state of the kidneys and lead to a proper treatment plan. For more information
on renal calcium/phosphorus imbalance, click here.
Acute Pancreatitis
The pancreas produces the enzymes we use to digest our food. There are numerous
safeguards to prevent these enzymes from digesting our own bodies but when the
pancreas gets inflamed, this is exactly what happens. When this condition presents
acutely, the patient has fairly sudden onset of extreme nausea, diarrhea and pain. As body
fats are digested, the triglycerides that are released bind blood calcium driving ionized
calcium levels down. Hypocalcemia can result. For more information on pancreatitis, click
here.
Toxins
Using a human phosphate-based enema to relieve constipation, adds a huge amount of
phosphate to the patient's system. The phosphate binds circulating calcium and can lead
to a calcium crisis especially in a small patient. Such products cannot safely be used in
pets so it is important not to attempt to treat constipation without veterinary guidance.
Antifreeze (ethylene glycol) poisoning leads to an almost untreatable acute kidney failure.
Part of the syndrome can include low blood calcium.
Parathyroid Hormone (PTH) Deficiency - Not Common but still a Classic Disease
As noted, when blood calcium levels drop, PTH would normally bring it back up. What
happens when there isn't any PTH or there isn't enough? Calcium stays low and vitamin D
is not activated. Phosphorus levels in blood rise as there is no PTH to enhance the
kidney's ability to reduce it. Elevated phosphorus levels further suppress the system for
Vitamin D activation.
The average age of onset for PTH deficiency is about 5 years for dogs and the most
frequently identified breeds are the toy poodle, the miniature schnauzer, the Labrador
retriever, the German shepherd dog, the dachshund, and the entire terrier group.
Symptoms
Without calcium, muscle contraction becomes abnormal and the nervous system more
excitable. Seizures (called hypocalcemic tetany) can result. This type of seizure occurs
when the calcium level drops below 6 mg/dl in dogs (but not cats) and seems to be
associated with exercise during the hypocalcemia state. Other symptoms include:
nervousness, disorientation, drunken walk, fever, weak pulses, excessive panting, muscle
tension, twitches and tremors. Cats tend to show more listlessness than dogs and also
tend to raise their third eyelids. Painful muscle cramping occurs that can lead a pet to
become aggressive. If calcium levels drop to 4 mg/dl or below, death generally results.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis is made by testing blood and urine. There are many causes of low blood
calcium besides hypoparathyroidism: low albumin levels, kidney failure, pancreatitis,
antifreeze poisoning, exposure to a phosphate enema, low magnesium, nutritional

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952400&ind=416&objTypeID=1007 3/5
deficiency (especially the infamous "all meat diet"), nursing a litter, and the list continues.
A history and physical examination will narrow this list substantially.
A basic blood panel and urinalysis is ordered for the medical work-up of most medical
conditions. If calcium is low and phosphorus is high, then the patient either is in kidney
failure or the patient has hypoparathyroidism. These two conditions are readily
distinguished by the other blood test results.
If for some reason it is not clear which condition the patient has, a PTH blood level will
settle the question. If the PTH level is low, then the patient truly has primary
hypoparathyroidism and will require lifelong treatment and monitoring (vs. a more
temporary calcium problem). PTH levels must be interpreted in the context of the low
calcium so they must be drawn before therapy is started.
Low magnesium levels in the body cause a secondary hypoparathyroidism so it is
important to run a magnesium level at some point in the work-up to rule this condition out.
Treatment
If the patient is having an acute crisis from the seizures and twitches and/or the calcium
level is dangerously low, hospitalization will be needed and calcium will be given
intravenously.
After the crisis has been overcome or if the patient is stable to start with, oral calcium and
vitamin D supplementation - the basis of long-term therapy - can be started. These two
oral medications take up to four days show an effect so many patients must receive
calcium in the hospital intravenously or under the skin during this period. Receiving
injections under the skin is vastly less expensive than hospitalization but the occasional
patient develops inflamed calcium deposits under the skin.
There are three forms of Vitamin D that can be used for long-term management of this
condition:
Vitamin D2 (ergocalciferol), DHT (Dihydrotachysterol), and Vitamin D3 (Calcitriol).
Vitamin D2
Vitamin D2 is an over-the-counter vitamin D supplement readily available where nutritional
supplements are sold. It is not recommended to treat hypoparathyroidism because when it
is first delivered into the body, it is stored in fat (not used as active vitamin D in the blood).
This means that before it can have any effect at all, the body's fat stores must be filled to
capacity with Vitamin D2. It will only circulate after the body's fat stores are filled. This
means needing many weeks of injectable calcium before switching to oral medication.
Further, if problems occur and calcium levels get too high, it means many weeks before
the fat stores deplete adequately to bring the calcium level down. Treatment of
hypoparathyroidism requires the ability to effect faster changes in blood calcium levels
than Vitamin D2 can manage.
DHT
DHT (Dihydrotachysterol) has a much faster onset of action (1-7 days) but if there is a
problem it can take 4 to 21 days to get the calcium level lowered. Occasionally animals
seem to be resistant to the pill form of this medication so liquid seems to be best.
Calcitriol
Calcitriol is the first choice medication for managing hypoparathyroidism. It is generally
given twice a day and has its maximum effect in one to four days. If calcium levels get too
high, they will drop in 1 to 14 days after discontinuing this medication. Calcitriol is made in
capsules for human use so a compounding pharmacy is generally needed to make a
dosing size that is appropriate for pets.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952400&ind=416&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Oral Calcium
Calcium supplements are available in most grocery stores, drug stores, and nutrition
supplementation stores. Calcium comes in several salts: calcium gluconate, calcium
lactate, calcium chloride, and calcium carbonate. They are not all created equal so you
need to know what you're doing when you choose a calcium supplement and intending to
give a specific amount of calcium. Because lactate and gluconate are such large
molecules, and calcium is so small, you need to give a lot more pills of calcium gluconate
or lactate to match the amount of calcium in the same number of pills of calcium chloride
or calcium carbonate. Because calcium chloride can irritate the stomach, calcium
carbonate is considered the supplement of choice. Do not change the type of calcium
supplementation you use without informing your vet so that proper dosing calculations can
be made.
In the future, it may become possible to supplement the patient with actual parathyroid
hormone but that day has not arrived.
Monitoring Tests
Too much blood calcium causes kidney failure and too little causes seizures. Blood
calcium is normally tightly regulated around a normal range and the goal in treatment is to
keep the range normal (8-9 mg/dl or 2.0-2.25 mmol/L). The stable patient with
hypoparathyroidism should come in quarterly for a calcium level to make sure no
problems are occurring and no dose adjustments are needed. If the calcium level is at an
undesirable level, dosing changes are done gradually to correct them.
Signs at home that calcium is getting too high include vomiting, diarrhea, excess water
consumption, and listlessness. If the calcium level becomes too high the patient may
require hospitalization and fluid therapy or simply discontinuing of the medication
depending on how far out of the desired range the calcium goes.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952400&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754287815
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypocalcemia (Low Blood Calcium) in Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952400&ind=416&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Photo Courtesy Dr. Sharon Buschette
Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Sugar) in Toy Breed Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 02, 2021
Published: July 31, 2005
The creation of different dog breeds represents
centuries of selective breeding to create true lines
of dogs all with similar desired characteristics.
Somewhere in all this breeding and selection, toy
breeds were deemed desirable and were hence
developed. Some typical examples of these very
small dogs are Chihuahua, Yorkshire Terrier,
Maltese, Toy Poodle, and Pomeranian.
And, of course, there are many others. Consider
that if these dogs are so tiny as adults how tiny they
must be as newborn puppies. These itty bitty babies
tend to cut their baby teeth in late and thus have
trouble chewing kibbled foods. They also have
difficulty maintaining body temperature which
promotes listlessness as they get cold. Both these
factors combine into reduced food intake and
difficulty keeping up normal blood sugar levels. Low
blood sugar, which is called hypoglycemia, creates
even more listlessness. Because the brain cannot
burn fat or protein and relies almost entirely on sugar, the potential result includes
incoordination, loss of consciousness and even seizures.
Before you Adopt
When you look at these darling miniature puppies, think twice before you adopt. The toy
breed puppy is frequently a high maintenance project. This is not a living stuffed animal;
this is a live creature with a handicap, at least until he or she has grown up a bit. You may
need to feed this animal 4-6 times daily. Soft puppy foods are often needed as these
puppies may not be able to eat hard food. They need extra warmth and it is important that
you make an appointment with your veterinarian for a well-baby check up promptly.
Puppies of this size do not tolerate fleas. They are simply too small to have any blood to
give away to blood sucking parasites. They need to be adequately dewormed and
checked over for any signs of infectious disease. Diarrhea is common for puppies but a
very tiny puppy cannot withstand the dehydration that accompanies diarrhea. Pet store
puppies are high risk for kennel cough and the pneumonia that sometimes accompanies it
in severe cases. Parvovirus or distemper are particular disasters for puppies of this size.
A young toy breed puppy is a project more so than any other type of puppy. If this is more
than you bargained for, you may want to get an adult toy breed dog or older puppy or
even another type of dog.
Puppies should be at least 8 weeks old for adoption. Ten weeks is even better when it
comes to micro-dogs like these.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Sugar) in Toy Breed Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952329&ind=417&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Preventing Problems
So you already have a toy breed puppy. Remember how sensitive to problems these
puppies are so if your puppy is coughing, has diarrhea, is vomiting, has appetite loss
(especially appetite loss!) or seems listless, waste no time in seeing the vet.
Be sure your puppy is eating and mentally engaged. If possible, look in your puppy’s
mouth and see if there are any teeth. In particular, look for the molars and premolars
along the sides of the mouth. These are teeth needed for chewing and they may come in
late. This will not stop your puppy from lapping up soft food. Be sure the food you are
using is soft enough and that your puppy will reliably eat it.
Nutrical: A Handy Supplement
This product is frequently provided by both veterinarians and breeders for use in toy breed
puppies. It consists basically of a malt-flavored paste with sugar and vitamins. Some
puppies will readily lap it off fingers and others will only take it if it is smeared on the roof
of the mouth. If a puppy seems listless, the first thing to do is attempt feeding. If the puppy
will not eat, a finger tip of Nutrical may make all the difference.
What to Do if you Think your Puppy Is Hypoglycemic
Potentially, hypoglycemia is an emergency. The puppy will be listless maybe even
uncoordinated. If the puppy is conscious, start by offering delicious food that he or she will
want to eat. This may be all you have to do to avert catastrophe if the puppy will accept
the meal. If you have Nutrical® as described above, this would be a great time to use it. In
an extreme case, the puppy will become cold, will lose consciousness and begin to have
seizures. For first aid, a small amount of Karo syrup can be rubbed on the gums. (It will
absorb through the gums; actual swallowing is not necessary). Beyond this and especially
if the puppy does not fully regain its normal playful attitude, the puppy should be rushed to
an animal hospital for treatment.
In the hospital, the puppy will be warmed and a blood sugar level checked. If intravenous
access is possible, dextrose will be infused directly into the blood stream. Response is
generally rapid once sugar is supplied in this way and a sugar drip or regular sugar
injections will be continued. But the puppy has to reliably eat before he can go home.
Anticipate the need for 24 hour care and expect a few days of care.
Complicating Factors
Bacterial infection
Bacteria can be tremendous consumers of glucose (blood sugar). For this reason,
hypoglycemic puppies may be given antibiotics.
Portosystemic (Liver) shunt
This is a problem for the Yorkshire terrier in particular. In this congenital malformation of
the liver circulation, blood travels from the GI tract to the general circulation by-passing
the liver. The liver does not develop properly and has abnormal function. One of the liver’s
functions is to maintain the body’s blood sugar level. An abnormal liver leads to low blood
sugar. This condition can frequently be cured with surgery. A liver function blood test is an
easy way to rule this condition out as a complicating factor.
Parasitism/Diarrhea/Stress
Stress from any cause increases the body’s demand for sugar. This is why it is especially
important to insure the general health of the toy breed puppy. When there are stressors,
maintaining a healthy blood sugar level is all the more difficult.
Sometimes there is more to hypoglycemia than just low blood sugar. While being extra
small and extra young is enough to drop blood sugar, sometimes there is more to the
story.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Sugar) in Toy Breed Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952329&ind=417&objTypeID=1007 2/3
When your puppy comes home again after a hypoglycemic episode, it is important to
watch food intake and be aware of any changes in energy level. As the puppy gets bigger,
risk factors diminish. Teeth get stronger, body fat stores develop, and the immune system
matures. Eventually, hypoglycemia risks become minimal and the puppy can continue life
as any other puppy, playing, chewing things up, and learning the behavior control
necessary to be a good house pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952329&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754287849
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:40 AM Hypoglycemia (Low Blood Sugar) in Toy Breed Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952329&ind=417&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo by Karen James
Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 11, 2019
Published: April 20, 2010
Obesity has become an extremely
important health problem in the
Western world, not just for humans but
for dogs and cats as well. Obesity in
pets is associated with joint problems,
diabetes mellitus, respiratory
compromise, and decreased life span.
Recent studies show approximately
60% of dogs and cats in the U.S. are
classified as obese or overweight,
making obesity an epidemic. Most pet
owners underestimate their pet's body
condition, in part because overweight
pets are so common that an
overweight body condition now seems
to be normal. We can assure you that there is nothing normal about being overweight.
Why Obesity is Bad
A common justification for over-feeding treats is that a pet deserves a higher quality of life
as a trade off for longevity. While this might on some level makes sense (after all, a pet
munching on a treat is certainly getting a great deal of satisfaction from doing so), the
other consequences do not make for higher life quality in the big picture. Here are some of
problems that obese animals must contend with while they are not enjoying their treats
and table scraps.
Arthritis
The over-weight animal has extra unneeded stress on joints, including the disks of the
vertebrae. This extra stress leads to the progression of joint degeneration and creates
more pain. Weight management alone decreases and can even eliminate the need for
arthritis medications. The problem is compounded as joint pain leads to poorer mobility,
which in turn leads to greater obesity.
Respiratory Compromise
The obese pet has a good inch or two of fat forming a constricting jacket around the chest.
This makes the pet less able to take deep breaths as more work is required to move the
respiratory muscles. Areas of the lung cannot fully inflate, so coughing results. The pet
also overheats more easily. Many cases of tracheal collapse and chronic cough can be
managed with only weight loss.

8/4/25, 11:41 AM Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952934&ind=418&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Diabetes Mellitus
Extra body fat leads to insulin resistance in cats just as it does in humans. In fact, obese
cats have been found to have a 50% decrease in insulin sensitivity. Weight management
is especially important in decreasing a cat’s risk for the development of diabetes mellitus.
Hepatic Lipidosis
When an overweight cat goes off food or partially off food because of illness or
psychological stress, body fat is mobilized to provide calories. Unfortunately, the cat’s liver
was not designed to process a large amount of body fat. The liver becomes infiltrated with
fat and then fails. A stress that might have been relatively minor, such as a cold, becomes
a life-threatening disaster.
Reduced Life Span
A study of age-matched Labrador retrievers found that dogs kept on the slender side of
normal lived a median of 2.5 years longer than their overweight counterparts.
Unwillingness to Accept Therapeutic Diets
If the pet should develop a condition where a therapeutic diet is of great benefit, the pet
that has been maintained primarily on a diet of table scraps may be unwilling to accept
commercial pet food of any kind, much less a food modified to be beneficial for a specific
disease process. This unwillingness will hamper treatment.
Increased Surgical/Anesthetic Risk
Obesity poses an extra anesthetic risk because drug dosing becomes less accurate. (It is
hard to estimate a patient’s lean body mass for drug dosing if it is encased in a fat suit.)
Furthermore, anesthesia is inherently suppressive to respiration and adding a constrictive
jacket of fat only serves to make proper air exchange more challenging. And still further,
surgery in the abdomen is hampered by the slippery nature of the extra fat as well as
difficulty visualizing all the normal structures through the copious fat deposits. One never
knows when a pet will require an emergency surgery (to say nothing of regular teeth
cleanings).
So is the enjoyment of all those extra treats really worth it?
How Did My Pet Get So Fat Without Eating That Much?
You might think weight management might be easier for a pet than it is for a human. After
all, the pet relies completely on someone else for feeding and exercise so it should follow
that if the humans in control can regulate feeding and exercise, the pet should lose
weight. It seems like this would be true but, as with humans, there is tremendous
individuality with how different pets store the food they have eaten. Beyond this,
sometimes it is hard to know what a pet is eating or the owner may not have a good sense
for how much should be fed. Here are some factors involved.
A Cup of Food Depends on the Cup
When food packages refer to a certain number of cups of kibble being appropriate for a
certain body weight, they are referring to an actual measuring cup. This may seem
obvious but many mugs, coffee cups, and other scooping cups may not be equal to a cup
measure. If you do not have a cup measure, you can often get one from your
veterinarian’s office as most manufacturers of reducing diets for pets provide free cup
measures.
Consider measuring food with a gram scale. This a far more accurate way of
measuring food amounts compared to cup measures.

8/4/25, 11:41 AM Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952934&ind=418&objTypeID=1007 2/5
This obese pug weighs far too much for his small frame. Photo by
Depositphotos.
The Package Guidelines are just
Guidelines
Many packages of food include on
their label some sort of feeding
schedule that indicates how much
food should be fed to a pet of a
certain weight. This information is
also available on most pet food web
sites as well. The problem is that
each pet is an individual and just as
one person weighing 150 lbs can be
obese and another person of the
same weight may be skinny, the
same is true of pets. These
guidelines are meant as a starting
point only. If your pet is too fat on
the recommended feeding schedule, then you should reduce the amount of food or
change to a diet that is higher in fiber so that a satisfying volume of food can still be eaten
without adding calories.
Genetics
Some animals simply have the genes that predispose them to obesity. Dog breeds with
genetic tendencies towards obesity include the: Golden Retriever, Cocker Spaniel,
Dachshund, Beagle, Shetland Sheepdog, Boxer, Cairn Terrier, Basset Hound, and
Labrador Retriever.
Children at Home
It is almost impossible to keep children from providing extra treats to their dog. This may
include snacks spilled during play (pets have no “five-second rule”) or purposely feeding
the pet unwanted food under the dining table. Similarly, pets that are allowed to roam
(usually cats) often find food left out by neighbors, either to purposely feed their own pets
or strays, or as unsecured trash. It is almost impossible to control the diet of an outdoor
cat.
Low Metabolism
Some pets do not burn calories efficiently; they simply have a slow metabolism. This might
be genetic as mentioned or it might be the result of a disease such as hypothyroidism or
Cushing’s disease. Testing for health problems such as these is helpful to get the best
treatment for resolution of the obesity. It seems like increasing exercise and eating a
healthier diet would be easy to accomplish for a pet but it generally does not turn out that
way.
Underestimating the Power of Treats
Many people express their affection for the pet by providing regular treats, and the pet
happily obliges by begging or even performing cute behaviors. For some people, feeding
treats to the pet constitutes a major part of the human-animal bond and they do not wish
to give it up or reduce it. Pet treats are often high in calories, though, and four or five
treats readily converts into an extra meal’s worth of added fat. Free feeding of dry food
encourages the pet to snack as well; meal feeding represents better calorie control.
Treats should not exceed 10% of the pet's feeding allotment.

8/4/25, 11:41 AM Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952934&ind=418&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Neutering
Sterilizing a pet is good for public health (fewer strays means fewer dog bites, less public
resources needed for animal shelters etc.), good for a better house pet (less urine
marking, tendency to fight or roam), no unwanted litters, reduced risk of many diseases,
etc. The change in the hormonal picture, though, creates a tendency to form more fat cells
(creating increased fat storage capacity – especially in female cats), and typically slows
metabolism. Spay/neuter is a excellent time to switch from free feeding to meal feeding.
Evaluation by Body Score
Sometimes it is hard to recognize that your pet is overweight as the weight gain has come
on gradually or it is hard to actually accept that your pet is more than just a little chubby
and is now fully obese. To assist in this evaluation, body condition scoring has been
developed and is fairly easy to accomplish. There are two scoring systems: a five-point
system (where three out of five is considered optimal) and a nine-point system where four
to five out of nine is considered optimal). To evaluate your pet, feel for a small amount of
padding over the ribs. It should be possible to feel the ribs and there should be a small
tuck in the belly where the hind legs meet the body.
See the body condition charts for dogs and cats.
What can be Done: Diet and Exercise
This sounds simple, but in fact when you simply try to cut back on food, it just does not
seem to work. Begging for food can result plus simply reducing the amount of a regular
diet (one not meant for weight loss), can lead to deficiency in vitamins or minerals.
As with humans, a more formal approach seems to work best. This means feeding a
prescription diet made for weight loss (typically “lite” or “less active” diets are meant to
prevent weight gain, not actually cause weight loss), feeding a measured amount, and
coming in for regular weigh-ins at the vet’s office.
This means:
There must be control over what the obese pet eats. That’s easy enough if
there is only one pet and roaming is not allowed, but trickier if there is more
than one pet in the home. Use your ingenuity to feed the pets separately.
Feed in meals. Leaving food out encourages snacking. Feeding in meals
makes it easier to feed multiple pets different foods or different amounts of
food.
Commit to regular weigh-ins. Know what the goal weight is and how long it
should take to reach this goal/or how to tell if the pet is on target. It is important
not to try to go too fast. If the weight loss is not on track, sometimes it is
necessary to feed more rather than less. Your veterinarian may need to be in
contact with the clinical nutritionists at the pet food company so as to make the
best recommendations.
Consider interactive toys that can be used when you are not home or where
your own participation is minimal.
Be sure to rule out health issues that might specifically cause obesity as an initial step in
obesity management.
Nutrigenomics

8/4/25, 11:41 AM Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952934&ind=418&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Nutrigenomics is the study of how food influences the expression of genes and how genes
influence the disposition of nutrients. This field is still in its infancy but is rapidly
developing such that one day nutritional programs can be designed based on one's own
individual genetic composition. We all have seen how different people metabolize the
same food in completely different ways and how changing to a similar diet can have
varying effects among individuals. There is currently only one commercial diet on the
market that uses principles of nutrigenomics to activate genes of fat-burning and create a
fat burning metabolism and that only available through veterinary clinics. This food system
employs dry food, canned food, and treats in any combination but in amounts determined
by the pet's initial body composition and calculated healthy weight. This approach has not
been found to be more effective with weight loss over the more traditional high fiber diets
but at the end of the program when the desired weight had been achieved, the animals on
the nutrigenomic diet had been metabolically altered to reduce storage of consumed fat.
Pets on traditional weight loss plans were not metabolically altered and were still "fat
storers" and potentially ready to regain the fat stores they had worked so hard to lose.
This food is for sale only through veterinarians so if you are interested in this concept, talk
to your veterinarian.
Do it Yourself without a Therapeutic Diet
Therapeutic diets are available only through veterinary clinics and authorized diet delivery
services. These types of foods are likely to cost more and/or be less convenient to obtain
than foods available at the grocery store or pet supply store so a pet owner may be
tempted towards do-it-yourself weight loss. As discussed, weight loss often turns out to be
more complicated than you imagine. If the problem is simply cutting out treats, adding
more exercise or in some way changing the human behavior that led to the pet's weight
condition, then you may have a good chance at getting results. If the problem is the pet's
metabolism, then it may be an uphill battle. Regular weigh-ins are still crucial and the pet
should not lose more than two percent of body weight per week. High-fiber diets tend to
work best for dogs while low-carbohydrate diets tend to work better for cats.
For more specific information, consult your veterinarian, and see the Association for Pet
Obesity Prevention.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952934&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754287881
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:41 AM Obesity is Unhealthy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=4952934&ind=418&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Tremoring or Shivering in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 24, 2023
Published: July 01, 2013
Dogs are often brought in for tremoring or shivering episodes. The patient can be any age
or any size. Tremors can involve only certain muscles or body areas or the entire dog.
Finding the reason behind tremors is tricky as tremoring occurs for many reasons.
The first step is to consider normal reasons for shivering. The patient is:
cold
frightened
asleep and dreaming.
Usually, these can be excluded from being a disease by providing a blanket or sweater,
comforting the anxious patient, or rousing the sleeping patient.
Elderly dogs with muscle atrophy tend to suffer muscle fatigue and muscles will shake
when over-worked. This type of tremoring is often pretty easy to distinguish as the patient
is elderly and the tremors begin when the patient has been standing longer than they
would prefer. When a muscle becomes fatigued, tremoring helps release stored
glycogen/glucose to permit continued muscle contraction. Tremoring generally stops when
the muscle is allowed to relax and the patient rests.
Mild shivers are rarely a significant symptom; it is the more violent involuntary tremors and
twitches that indicate neuromuscular disease.
Conditions When Only Certain Body Parts Tremor
If only certain body parts tremor, there are some neuromuscular diseases to consider.
Intention Tremors
Diseases involving the cerebellum of the brain will lead to tremors when the patient directs
his attention to a task. The patient may sit quietly without tremors, but if a bowl of food is
put out, tremors of the neck and head erupt when the patient reaches for the food.
This sort of tremoring generally goes way beyond what might be described as shivering or
even twitching. A classic example of cerebellar intention tremors is seen in kittens born
with cerebellar hypoplasia, a neurologic condition stemming from the mother becoming
infected with or vaccinated for feline distemper during pregnancy.
Cerebellar disease certainly does not have to be congenital. Any damage to the
cerebellum (trauma, tumor, infection, etc.) can produce an intention tremor. An intention
tremor is highly suggestive of disease in the cerebellum, though, and diagnostics should
be pursued to uncover the nature of that disease. See a video of these wobbly kittens.
Idiopathic Head Tremors
No one really knows why this occurs but some dogs have episodes of head bobbing
(usually up and down but can be side to side). Breeds that seem over-represented are

8/4/25, 11:42 AM Tremoring or Shivering in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=5862540&ind=419&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Boxers, English bulldogs, beagles, and Doberman pinschers. This condition is totally
unresponsive to seizure medications and the best way to curtail an episode seems to be
to focus the dog’s attention on a toy or treat. Episodes tend to get milder with age. See
this boxer's head tremors.
Distemper Myoclonus
Dogs that survive a canine distemper infection may suffer from seizures, paralysis, or
muscle twitching long term. Often a young dog is adopted from the shelter or rescue, and
her history is unknown. Distemper myoclonus appears as involuntary twitches of muscle
groups anywhere on the body. Multiple areas can be involved. These twitches are not
seizures and do not respond to seizure medications. Numerous medications have been
used with inconsistent results. The most successful treatment has involved injections of
cosmetic Botox® into the muscle group involved, but this therapy is expensive and many
dogs do not seem particularly inconvenienced by their myoclonus. In this video, the black
dog is showing myoclonus of his jaw and neck muscles.
Orthostatic Tremors
This condition is observed only when the dog is standing and involves tremors of the leg
muscles. The patient is typically a young, very large-breed dog (Great Dane, mastiff,
Weimaraner). The condition tends to progress in severity over time and may come to
require treatment. It is generally responsive to phenobarbital and/or to gabapentin.
Conditions When the Whole Body Tremors
If the entire dog is shivering and shaking, then we must consider diseases that involve the
entire dog. Normal muscles rely on oxygen, nutrients, and electrolytes from the
bloodstream as well as normal electrical stimulation from the nervous system. We need to
look at problems with these systems:
Hypocalcemia (low blood calcium, especially if nursing puppies)
Hypoglycemia (low blood sugar)
Toxins (especially snail bait and insecticides)
Little White Shaker Dog syndrome (which does not actually require that the
patient be a white dog), is also called non-suppurative
meningoencephalomyelitis or steroid-responsive tremors.
Seizures/epilepsy.
Severe tremors can elevate the body temperature dangerously and cause brain damage.
Patients for which tremoring is an emergency are generally clearly mentally distressed by
the involuntary motions or disoriented from the underlying neurologic disease.
Many toxins can cause twitches and involuntary muscle tremors, so it is important to let
your veterinarian know what products are in your home. What flea products do you use?
Do you have pesticides in the garden? These products are frequently neurotoxins that
produce seizures and twitching. Snail baits containing metaldehyde are particularly
common, as are permethrin-based flea products (generally safe for dogs but cats are
uniquely sensitive). Tremors are a notable feature of chocolate toxicity. Obviously,
poisoning is an emergency so you will need to see your veterinarian or local emergency
service right away.
The Animal Poison Control Center is a 24-hour service run by the ASPCA.
Consultations with veterinary toxicologists are $95 and are available around the
clock in the event of an emergency. It is a good idea to keep their phone number
handy. 888-426-4435

8/4/25, 11:42 AM Tremoring or Shivering in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=5862540&ind=419&objTypeID=1007 2/3
HomeAgain offers 24-7 Medical Hotline access included in premium memberships
with a HomeAgain microchip ID. In this case, the phone number is: 888-
HOMEAGAIN then follow the prompts to connect.
Brain diseases can produce seizures that can manifest as persistent but fine tremoring or
more violent convulsions. Metabolic diseases, such as low blood sugar or low blood
calcium, can lead to tremors and even seizures. Muscle diseases such as tetanus can
lead to involuntary muscle contraction. Twitches and tremors may be intermittent and are
certainly not always emergencies; however, blood testing and possibly advanced
neurological testing may be needed. Your first step is going to be an evaluation with your
veterinarian to narrow down the search and complete the necessary basic tests. Not all
veterinarians are comfortable diagnosing neurologic disease, so discuss with your
veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would be best for you and your pet. The best
treatment plan can be made from there.
The small white dog in this video has White Shaker syndrome. It is generally controlled
with immune-suppressive doses of corticosteroids. The prognosis (outlook) is generally
good.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5862540&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754287918
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:42 AM Tremoring or Shivering in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254098&id=5862540&ind=419&objTypeID=1007 3/3
