Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in FlatFaced Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 01, 2025
Published: January 01, 2001
Dogs with Short Faces
Most people are not familiar with the
term brachycephalic, but if you own
a Pug, Boston Terrier, Pekingese,
Boxer, Bulldog, Shih Tzu, or any
one of the other breeds with
pushed-in or short faces, you
should become familiar with this
word. The word comes from the
Greek roots brachy, meaning short,
and cephalic, meaning head.
Brachycephalic dogs have been
bred so as to possess a normal
lower jaw that is in proportion to
their body size and a compressed
upper jaw. In producing this
cosmetic appearance, these
animals have been compromised in many important ways, and you, as an owner, must be
familiar with your pet's needs.
The Respiratory System and Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome
Brachycephalic breeds make a lot of snorting respiratory sounds, simply because of the
way their throats and faces are shaped. These sounds are generated from a combination
of several anatomic deformities that will be described below. These deformities occur to
varying degrees of severity. Most brachycephalic dogs are not hampered by their anatomy
on a day-to-day basis, but they do have limitations that must be recognized. Severely
affected individuals require surgical intervention.
Stenotic Nares
This is a fancy name for narrowed nostrils. The brachycephalic dog's respiratory passage
begins with very small, often slit-like, nasal openings for breathing. This leads to a great
deal of open-mouth breathing and panting as the nasal breathing route is limited by its
small opening. In selecting a puppy for adoption, it is a good idea to look at the nostril
sizes on each member of the litter and look for the widest opening. Stenotic nares can be
surgically corrected after the age of five months.
Enlarged Tongue (Macroglossa)

8/4/25, 11:52 AM Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in Flat-Faced Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951534&ind=480&objTypeID=1007 1/5
A caudal nasal turbinate (formally referred to as
nasopharyngeal turbinates). Photo courtesy Dr. Brendan
McKiernan.
The brachycephalic dog's tongue can be particularly thick and large, which contributes to
the overall obstruction. The French and English bulldogs seem particularly predisposed to
this issue.
Elongated Soft Palate
It is difficult to fit the soft tissues of the
canine mouth and throat into the
brachycephalic's short face. As a result,
the soft palate, which separates the nasal
passage from the oral cavity, flaps loosely
down into the throat, creating snorting
sounds. Virtually all brachycephalics suffer
from this, but actual respiratory distress is
rare except in English Bulldogs. The
English Bulldog tends to have more severe
symptoms in almost all aspects of
brachycephalic syndrome. Excess barking
or panting may lead to swelling in the
throat, which can, in turn, lead to trouble.
Again, the soft palate can be surgically
trimmed.
Tracheal Stenosis/Hypoplastic Trachea
The trachea is also known as the windpipe. The brachycephalic dog's windpipe may be
dangerously narrowed in places. This condition creates tremendous anesthetic risk and
should be ruled out by chest radiographs prior to any surgical procedures, as anesthetic
safety depends on the placement of a tube in the windpipe to secure air passage. If the
trachea is too small, intubation may not be possible, and it is important to know this in
advance of any planned procedure. The English bulldog is particularly predisposed to this
anatomical defect.
Everted Laryngeal Saccules
The normal larynx has two small pockets called ventricles or saccules. When a dog has
increased effort to breathe, over time, these little pockets will actually turn inside out inside
the throat. When this occurs, it obstructs the throat. This condition can be corrected
surgically; however, in many cases, it resolves on its own after the stenotic nares are
corrected, so surgery is generally only performed in severe situations. The pug is
especially predisposed to this situation.
Heat Stress, Excitement, and Exercise
Because of all these upper respiratory obstructions, the brachycephalic dog pants
inefficiently. A dog with a more conventional face and throat is able to pass air quickly over
the tongue through panting. Saliva evaporates from the tongue as air is passed across,
and the blood circulating through the tongue is efficiently cooled and circulated back to the
rest of the body.
In brachycephalic dogs, so much extra work is required to move the same amount of air
that the airways become inflamed and swollen. This inflammation leads to a more severe
obstruction, distress, and further overheating, which is potentially a life-threatening
problem. It should always be a consideration during stressful situations, especially air
travel.
The American Veterinary Medical Association has travel guidelines for brachycephalic
dogs.
The American College of Veterinary Surgeons has further information on brachycephalic
obstructive airway syndrome.

8/4/25, 11:52 AM Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in Flat-Faced Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951534&ind=480&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Brachycephalic dogs are the most likely candidates for heat stroke.
Altogether, the upper airways of the brachycephalic dog compromise the ability to take in
air. Under normal conditions, the compromise is not great enough to cause a problem;
however, an owner should take care not to let the dog become grossly overweight or get
too hot in the summer. Be aware of what degree of snorting and sputtering is usual for
your pet, and should your dog require general anesthesia or sedation, your vet may want
to take extra precautions or take radiographs beforehand to assess the severity of the
syndrome. Anesthetic risk is higher than usual in these breeds, though under most
circumstances, the necessary extra precautions are readily managed by most animal
hospitals.
To be clear, brachycephalic syndrome can
be progressive if it is not corrected at an
early stage. Severely affected dogs can
experience collapse of the larynx and
require a permanent tracheostomy (a hole
in the throat for breathing).
Gastrointestinal Tract
There appears to be a combination of
stomach and swallowing issues related to
the respiratory obstruction. In
brachycephalic breeds, the esophagus (the
tube that conducts swallowed food from
the throat to the stomach) experiences
reflux of stomach contents backwards. This
is a type of acid reflux, and it is painful and
inflammatory. Compounding this problem is that brachycephalic dogs tend to retain food in
their stomachs for prolonged periods. The pooling of food in the stomach creates a
sensation of nausea and increases the potential for vomiting and/or stomach acid reflux.
The English bulldog seems particularly predisposed to GI complications in this way. This
sounds like a separate issue from the respiratory syndrome, but in fact, the reflux,
regurgitation, and even herniation of part of the stomach into the chest cavity stem from
the extreme inhalation efforts made against the upper airway obstruction that comes from
the shape of the brachycephalic head. Medications are helpful for intestinal issues, as is
weight control, but often correcting the respiratory obstruction corrects the intestinal
problems as well.
Eye Problems
With most of the nasal bones compacted, brachycephalic dogs tend to have trouble with
the way their eyes sit in their heads. The eye sockets are shallow, making the eyeballs
especially prominent and vulnerable. Often a nasal fold of skin rubs on the eyeball and/or
there are eyelashes rubbing on the eye.
Lagophthalmos
Sometimes, the eyes are so prominent that the lids cannot close all the way over them.
This will lead to irritation and drying of the center of the eye unless surgical correction is
performed. If you cannot tell by watching your pet blink, watch as your pet sleeps to be
sure the eyelids close all the way. If the eyelids cannot protect the eyes, blinding
pigmentary changes will form, irritating the eyes.
Nasal Fold Irritation

8/4/25, 11:52 AM Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in Flat-Faced Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951534&ind=480&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Many brachycephalic dogs have a fold of skin between the nose and eyes. This skin fold
may need regular cleaning as it tends to collect skin oil and moisture, but it can also be
prominent enough to rub on the actual eyeball. Chronic irritation will show as a pigmented
area on the eye surface, especially on the side nearest the nose. This is hard to see
without a bright light but if it is noted, a search for the cause is warranted. Depending on
the location of the pigmentation, surgery may be recommended.
Entropion (Turned-In Eyelids)
The shortened face leads to rolling of the eyelids in such a way that the eyelashes or even
hairy skin can rub the eye. This is not only uncomfortable but will damage the eye. Some
dogs have eyelids that droop or turn out in one area but turn inward in another area
(usually the corner of the eye). Surgical correction may be needed to protect the eye and
restore comfort.
Dry Eye (Keratoconjunctivitis Sicca)
Brachycephalic breeds tend to get more than their share of tear production problems. In
this situation, inadequate tears are produced so a thick, goopy, yellow eye discharge
results. In response to the irritation, the eye becomes pigmented and can become blind if
treatment is not instituted. This condition is treatable with medication so it is important to
recognize it before it progresses to a point where vision is lost and the goal is simply
restoring comfort.
Risk of Proptosis
Recognize the prominence of the eyes on brachycephalic. The bony eye sockets are very
shallow. This means that any blow to the back of the head, even a fairly minor one, can
cause an eye to pop from its socket (proptosis) and require surgical replacement or even
removal of the eye. This can also happen with too much pulling against the leash if the pet
is wearing a collar. You may wish to consider a harness for your pet. Traumatic proptosis
is frequently blinding to the eye that was popped out.
Other Concerns
The normal dog has 42 teeth in the mouth. The brachycephalic dog also has 42 teeth, but
a lot less space to fit them in. This means that the teeth will be crowded and growing in at
odd angles, which, in turn, traps food debris and leads to periodontal disease at a far
younger age than in non-brachycephalics. The earlier you begin using home care dental
products, the longer you will be able to postpone full dentistry under general anesthesia.
As mentioned, skin fold infections are common in the facial folds of the brachycephalic
breeds. Be sure to examine these areas periodically for redness. Even if the fold does not
rub on the eyeball, it will likely need regular cleaning and topical disinfection.
The broad-headed nature of these breeds makes reproduction a tricky matter as a
Caesarean section is frequently needed. Difficult labor is common and, as surgical
assistance is often necessary, it is important not to breed females with tracheal stenosis
(see above). Brachycephalic breeding is not for the inexperienced.
Altogether, the brachycephalic breeds show plenty of personality and intelligence, just as
all dogs do, but because of their specific needs, their owners need extra knowledge. If you
have any questions about your brachycephalic dog, don't hesitate to call your veterinarian.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951534&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288565

8/4/25, 11:52 AM Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in Flat-Faced Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951534&ind=480&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:52 AM Brachycephalic Airway Obstruction Syndrome in Flat-Faced Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951534&ind=480&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Breathing Problems: First Aid
Roger Gfeller, DVM, DACVECC; Michael Thomas, DVM; Isaac Mayo; The VIN Emergency Medicine
Consultants
Revised: August 13, 2023
Published: December 31, 1994
Difficulty breathing is also called dyspnea and is a medical emergency.
Respiratory distress is recognized by increased effort to breathe; noisy or squeaky
breathing; and cyanosis (a bluish tinge to the lips, tongue, and mucous membranes). In
cats, breathing with the mouth open (panting like a dog) is a sign of severe distress and
should be evaluated by a veterinarian right away.
It is imperative to get the pet examined to determine the cause. Diagnostic tests such as
X-rays, blood tests, and ultrasound may be needed, but the pet must be stabilized (often
with oxygen or by removing fluid from the chest) before they can withstand the rigors of
testing if respiratory distress is severe.
What to Do
Brachycephalic (short-nosed) breeds (e.g., English bulldog, Pekingese, and Pug) warrant
a special mention. Because of the short nose, the soft palate can interfere with breathing.
On hot days or in hot, humid environmental conditions these dogs try to cool off by panting
vigorously, and the soft palate interferes even more. This cycle continues until the dog is
severely dyspneic and overheated. Cooling these dogs is imperative. Move them to a cool
environment and seek immediate veterinary care. This syndrome is manageable only by
protecting these breeds from heat or by surgically reconstructing the soft palate.
Keep the pet and yourself calm.
If the pet has choked on a foreign body, perform the Heimlich maneuver and/or
a finger sweep (see Choking).
Perform rescue breathing if necessary (see rescue breathing in the choking
article).
If the pet is overheated, moisten the feet and ears with cool water to promote
heat exchange.
If you are driving to the veterinary hospital or ER, turn the air conditioner in the
car on to its coldest setting.
Seek veterinary assistance as soon as possible.
What NOT to Do
Do not upset the pet.
To avoid the risk of being bitten, do not perform rescue breathing on a
conscious pet.

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Breathing Problems: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951325&ind=481&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Do not give anything by mouth.
Potential Causes
Dyspnea, or difficulty breathing, is a serious sign. Causes include:
Congestive heart failure
Asthma
Cancer
Fluid buildup in or around the lungs
Bronchitis
Pneumonia
Laryngeal paralysis (a condition usually seen in older pets in which they
lose the ability to open and close their airway)
Obstruction of the trachea
and many other conditions.
Browse the complete Veterinary Partner First Aid collection.
Introduction: First Aid
Abscess: First Aid
Bandaging: First Aid
Bee Stings and Insect Bites: First Aid
Bleeding: First Aid
Bloat: First Aid
Burns: First Aid
Can't Breathe: First Aid
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR): First Aid
Chemical Injuries: First Aid
Choking: First Aid
Dehydration: First Aid
Diarrhea and Vomiting: First Aid
Difficult Birth: First Aid
Drowning or Near Drowning: First Aid
Electrocution: First Aid
Eye Injuries: First Aid
Fainting and Dizziness (Syncope): First Aid
Fever: First Aid
Fractures and Injuries: First Aid
Hyperthermia (Heat Stroke): First Aid
Hypothermia: First Aid
Impalement and Penetrating Injuries: First Aid
Nosebleed: First Aid
Paralysis: First Aid
Physical Exam Checklist for Pets: First Aid
Poisoning in Dogs and Cats
Preventing a Health and Safety Crisis: First Aid
Seizures and Convulsions: First Aid
Shock: First Aid
Snakebite: First Aid

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Breathing Problems: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951325&ind=481&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Straining to Eliminate: First Aid
Sunburn: First Aid
Transporting an Injured Pet: First Aid
Wounds: First Aid
Wrapping Up First Aid
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951325&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288597
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Breathing Problems: First Aid - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951325&ind=481&objTypeID=1007 3/3

CIRDC is endemic (i.e. always present in dog
populations), with various known bacterial and
viral causes.
Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex (CIRDC)
J. Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM
Revised: November 20, 2024
Published: November 29, 2023
The following article has been adapted from the Worms & Germs Blog, by Dr.
Scott Weese, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM.
Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex or
CIRDC is an endemic disease (always present in
populations), with various known bacterial and viral
causes.
Each year, more and more dog owners ask, “What’s
going on with this reported outbreak of respiratory
disease in dogs in the US? What new disease is
this?”
Veterinarians actually don’t expect a new disease in
this situation, and it can be hard to tell the extent of
“outbreaks” because of many factors. Various
groups have reported respiratory disease, which we
refer to as CIRDC in dogs in various parts of the
US.
CIRDC signs include:
A “honking” cough that may sound like
retching
Sneezing, and discharge from the eyes and or nose
Lethargy, decreased appetite, and labored breathing
Not all dogs show all of these signs, and each case can be slightly different.
There’s always limited info about the number of dogs with this illness due to a lack of
funding for research, no real surveillance system, and testing that doesn’t necessarily
change treatment for these dogs. Also, the disease description is usually vague…
coughing dogs, some that get pneumonia, and unfortunately, a few that die.
The issue is that this largely describes the normal state. Again, CIRDC is
endemic (i.e. always present in dog populations), with various pathogens at play
including canine parainfluenza virus, Bordetella bronchiseptica, canine respiratory
coronavirus, canine pneumovirus, canine influenza virus, Streptococcus
zooepidemicus... roughly in that order of occurrence, and maybe the
mysterious bacteria, Mycoplasma. There are also likely a range of viruses that have been
present for a long time that we don’t diagnose.

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex (CIRDC) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=11818579&ind=482&objTypeID=1007 1/3
We see CIRDC all the time, everywhere. There’s a background level of disease
that usually flies under the radar, alongside periodic clusters. Media and social
media can drive outbreak concerns which can be great to get the word out and
help sort out issues, but often, they lead to false alarms.
As Dr. Scott Weese explains in his blog, Worms & Germs, “For example, we might have
100 dogs with CIRDC every week in Guelph (Ontario, Canada), a city of about 150,000
people (a complete guess since we have no way to track this). Usually, few people hear
about it. The dogs typically get better, and life goes on. However, if someone starts talking
about it on social media, we might hear about 50 of those 100 cases. All of a sudden, we
have an ‘outbreak of a disease affecting dozens of dogs’ when in reality, we might just
have our normal background level of disease that people are noticing.”
The same thing happens more broadly. There are thousands of coughing dogs in the US
every day since there are millions of dogs. Once people start talking about it, some of
these comments go from, "Oh, my dog is coughing. I guess he picked up something at the
park.” to comments like, “My dog has this new disease that’s sweeping the nation."
With the first approach, it's likely that no one but the owner usually knows or is concerned.
When people are very worried about their beloved pets, panic, and post on social media, it
can lead to further assumptions that things are much scarier or that a “new disease” is
developing.
So, what are these reports reflecting?
A multistate outbreak caused by some new bacterium/virus
A multistate outbreak caused by our usual suspects, for some reason
Unconnected sporadic local outbreaks caused by usual suspects
A slight increase in baseline disease
Our normal disease activity has resulted in an outbreak of media attention.
Dr. Weese suspects it’s one of the last two and that veterinarians have been seeing a bit
more CIRDC activity over the past couple of years, with a somewhat greater incidence of
severe cases.
Other factors to consider:
With more cases, veterinarians see more severe disease.
Brachycephalic or short-nosed breeds (French bulldogs, pugs, etc.) with a
higher likelihood of dysfunctional breathing are very popular and much more
likely to have severe outcomes from any respiratory disease.
Increases in deaths could be linked to the dogs’ physiology, not disease factors.
Things are still unfolding for the veterinary community with CIRDC, but right now there
does not appear to be a need for increased concern.
What can you do to protect your dog?
Limit your dog’s contacts, especially traveling family or friends with dogs of
unknown health status.
Keep your dog away from sick dogs.
If your dog is sick, keep it away from other dogs.
Talk to your vet about vaccination against causes of CIRDC including canine
parainfluenza (CPIV), Bordetella bronchiseptica, and canine influenza (which is
more sporadic and vaccine availability is still an issue).

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex (CIRDC) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=11818579&ind=482&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Overall, if you are concerned that your dog may have CIRDC or that they may be exposed
due to certain activities, talk to your veterinarian. They can tell you what may increase
their chances of contracting CIRDC and what to look out for based on your pet’s health
status.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11818579&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288621
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:53 AM Canine Infectious Respiratory Disease Complex (CIRDC) - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=11818579&ind=482&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Graphic by MarVistaVet
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 08, 2024
Published: September 29, 2011
What is Bronchitis?
Most of us have heard of
bronchitis, and most of us
have probably suffered from it
at some point. The bronchi
are the larger airways through
which air is moved throughout
the lungs. The trachea
(windpipe) brings air from the
throat down into the chest
and branches into two
mainstem bronchi, one for
each lung. Each mainstem
bronchus branches into
smaller bronchi, which
eventually become smaller
structures called bronchioles
that, in turn, branch, and rebranch, eventually ending
with the alveoli, small
chambers where oxygen is
absorbed into our bodies from
the air we inhale.
Listen to a dog
cough. Coughing, reverse sneezing, and retching to vomit are commonly confused. The
dog in this video is coughing.
Bronchi are basically tubes made of cartilage, forming the larger "pipes" in our lungs.
When the bronchi are injured by irritants (cigarette smoke, air pollution, biochemical
products of infection, etc.), they respond with a healing process that is inherently
inflammatory. When the injury becomes ongoing, the inflammatory/healing process also
becomes ongoing and the end result involves excessive mucus production in the airways.
The mucus obstructs the smaller bronchi, which stimulates coughing, which in turn leads
to irritation and then to inflammation, and then to more mucus. A vicious cycle results.
Once the vicious cycle of mucus production to coughing to inflammation to more mucus
has become entrenched, it is unlikely to be cured and therapy is geared towards
controlling the symptoms.
What is Chronic Bronchitis?

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5138343&ind=483&objTypeID=1007 1/5
In order to fit the definition of "chronic bronchitis", the coughing condition in question must
(obviously) be chronic. Bronchitis can be temporary, as in short-term infectious diseases
such as Kennel Cough, or it can be chronic, which basically means it just doesn't seem to
go away. To fit the definition of “chronic”, the cough must be present daily for at least two
months. Chronic bronchitis is a lifelong condition once it starts; it never fully goes away
but can be managed.
The second part of the definition of chronic bronchitis is that the chronic cough condition
must include bronchial inflammation. (In other words, chronic bronchitis must be both
chronic and bronchitis.) There are many causes of ongoing cough; bronchitis is certainly
not the only one. For example, heart disease can cause chronic cough, as can tracheal
collapse, and certain types of parasitism or even cancer can cause ongoing coughing.
The character of the cough (wet, dry, “honking,” productive, etc.) is not particularly helpful
in determining the cause of the cough, as coughing can sound similar regardless of its
cause. Diagnostic tests are needed to get the right diagnosis, whether it is bronchitis or
something else. It is very important to determine whether or not a reversible underlying
cause is present.
Diagnosis and Testing
There are many conditions that make dogs cough chronically, including but not limited to:
Pneumonia
Tracheal collapse
Fungal infection in the lung
Lungworms
Cancer
Heart failure
Heartworm infection
Note that asthma is conspicuously missing from this list. Asthma involves recurring
episodes of airway inflammation and narrowing rather than continuous (non-episodic)
airway inflammation. Asthma is not a natural clinical entity in dogs, though it is certainly a
well-described condition in cats.
Radiographs
(X-rays) of the
lungs are
crucial in ruling
out conditions
that have a
specific
treatment. In
bronchitis,
mucus in the
airways tends
to outline the
shape of the
airways in
patterns that
look like
parallel lines
(so-called tram
lines) when
looking at an
airway’s side
view or circles
(so-called

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5138343&ind=483&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Chest radiograph of a dog with bronchitis. The heart is the oval structure in the center. The lacy
white texture of the lungs comes from mucus and other inflammatory secretions clinging to (and
visually highlighting) the airway walls. Image courtesy of MarVistaVet.
doughnuts)
when looking
at an airway to
end on. In
bronchitis, the airways may be dilated as well, especially if the case is advanced. Other
conditions tend to have characteristic radiographic appearances of their own but there is
definitely room for ambiguity.
In a perfect world, bronchoscopy can be performed, and samples of the airway secretions
can be analyzed. In bronchoscopy, a small video camera is inserted down the airway
system. The color and character of the airway walls can be examined, and a fluid wash
can be used to aspirate out secretion samples. General anesthesia is required for this
procedure. This YouTube video shows a bronchoscopy and sampling of the airway
secretion.
Alternatively, a tracheal wash can be done to obtain samples using tubing and fluid
washes. In this procedure, only samples are taken, and there is no camera involved and
no visual inspection of the airways. Sedation is generally needed.
Sedation and anesthesia are not without risk in patients with lung compromise, so the
benefit of obtaining diagnostic information must be weighed against patient risk. Often
invasive procedures are skipped, and trial courses of medication are used.
Treatment
There are several aspects to the treatment of bronchitis. Often a weight loss program
relieves so much chest restriction that medications become unnecessary. Physical
therapy techniques can be used to clear secretions. Medications can be used to relieve
inflammation, dilate airways, and reduce secretions, but some trial and error are often
needed to get the right combination. Newer inhalant therapies can spare the patient many
potential drug side effects.
Trial Courses of Medication
Different individuals respond to different medications, and in bronchitis, there are several
options to choose from and even combine.
Corticosteroids
Corticosteroids such as prednisone relieve inflammation and cut secretions as no other
medication can. Typically, a short course is used to control symptoms initially followed by
a lower dose maintenance course. This helps dry up the mucus in the airways and stop
the cough-irritation vicious cycle. The problem is that oral steroids have side effects
potential with long-term use. Furthermore, because they are suppressive to the
inflammatory process, it is important to rule out infectious causes of coughing that might
be made worse with steroid use.
As an alternative to oral steroids,
inhaled steroids can be used as is
done with human asthmatics. A special
facemask is used, and a spacer
connects the mask to the metered
dose inhaler. A couple of puffs from the
inhaler doses the dog with inhaled
steroids, and then it is possible to
avoid the systemic side effects
associated with oral steroids. Dogs
typically need to use inhalers at least
twice a day to control the symptoms of

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5138343&ind=483&objTypeID=1007 3/5
AeroDawg inhaler device. Photo used with permission of Trudell
Medical International
bronchitis. Airway dilators can also be
given via inhalation in the same way as
steroids.
Cough Suppressants
The cough itself is involved in the vicious cycle of irritation described above. Suppression
of the cough reflex through medication may be helpful in establishing patient comfort. On
the other hand, we want our patient to be able to clear the mucus from the inflamed
airways if there is an excess of mucus. Common medications used are hydrocodone and
butorphanol. Over-the-counter human products are often ineffective and may be
combined with harmful additional medications such as decongestants or pain relievers.
Never medicate your pet without checking with your veterinarian first about what
product to use and how to dose it.
Airway Dilators
Although airways technically do not constrict in chronic bronchitis, it may be helpful to
relax them, allowing air to pass through bronchi that had previously been so small as to
be blocked by mucus. Common medications include albuterol, terbutaline, and
theophylline. These are frequently used in combination with corticosteroids to reduce
cough.
Mucolytics
An over-the-counter supplement called N-acetylcysteine may be helpful. This supplement
works by breaking down sulfur bonds in the airway mucus, creating a more watery
secretion. Thinner secretions may be easier to clear. The use of this supplement has not
been formally studied for this use but it is an option that might be helpful.
Check with your veterinarian about what to use and how to use it.
Antibiotics?
Chronic bronchitis is not an infectious disease but all the inflammation and mucus in the
lung certainly compromises the patient’s normal resistance to infection and ability to clear
inhaled bacteria. Sometimes antibiotics are a helpful temporary addition to the therapies
listed above. More commonly, antibiotics are used early in the treatment course to rule
out infectious causes of cough before the use of corticosteroids, which are immune
suppressive.
Other Therapies
Nebulization and Coupage
It is important for the bronchitis patient to cough up inflammatory secretions as long as
coughing does not become excessive and perpetuate the inflammation. It is not easy to
draw the line as to when the cough is helpful and when it is excessive; only experience
will tell. In patients for whom coughing is encouraged, it may be useful to moisten
secretions with a vaporizer or even a nebulizer; the difference in these pieces of
equipment is the size of the water droplet they generate. Inhalation of water vapor a
couple of times daily will help keep secretions moist.
Coupage is a form of respiratory physical therapy that allows for moistened secretions to
be moved into more central airways so they can be coughed up. See a YouTube video of
how to do coupage.
Obesity Management
Pressure on the chest from body fat hampers the patient’s ability to take a deep breath.
Many patients with chronic coughs do not require medication after excess weight has
been lost simply because the chest can then expand properly.
Minimize Airway Irritants

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5138343&ind=483&objTypeID=1007 4/5
It is especially important to minimize irritants
circulating in the air. If possible, cigarette smoking
should be limited to outdoor areas. If house
painting, cleaning, or remodeling is planned, the pet
should probably be boarded or stay elsewhere until
any fumes have dissipated. It may be a good idea
to get a good air filter for home use to minimize
dust, pollens, or molds in the air.
Chronic bronchitis represents an ongoing airway
change that generally cannot be cured; however,
symptoms are manageable for most patients.
Discuss the options for therapy with your
veterinarian, expect some trial and error to be
necessary, and it is likely the outcome will be a
system that keeps your pet comfortable.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5138343&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288647
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5138343&ind=483&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Illustration by MarVistaVet
Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor
Contagious
Mark Rishniw, BVSc, PhD, DACVIM (SA-IM), DACVIM (CA); Brendan C. McKiernan, DVM, DACVIM
Revised: February 24, 2022
Published: September 27, 2010
Definition and Causes
Chronic bronchitis is usually a non-infectious, inflammatory condition affecting the lining
(mucosa) of the large airways (the trachea and bronchi) that results in a cough on most
days for more than two months. In most cases, the specific cause of chronic bronchitis in
dogs is not identified. Chronic bronchitis is neither infectious nor contagious to other
dogs; dogs will not pass it on to other dogs as they can in the acute form (see below).
Acute bronchitis, on the other hand, is most often caused by infectious agents, such as
viruses (e.g. parainfluenza virus, adenovirus, canine influenza virus, distemper virus, or
bacterial agents Bordetella bronchiseptica is the most common). It is commonly termed
kennel cough or canine infectious tracheobronchitis. Inflammation can also be caused by
noxious irritants such as second hand smoke, foreign bodies, allergens (similar to hay
fever in humans), foods allergens, and either migrating or primary lung parasites. In many
of these cases, this acute bronchitis, occurring at the time of the infection or insult, will
resolve with appropriate therapy from your veterinarian. However, if the bronchitis
persists long enough – generally, more than a few months – it is labeled chronic, and the
cough itself can begin to cause and perpetuate airway inflammation.
Clinical Signs
Dogs with chronic bronchitis generally have a persistent
hacking cough. Some people describe it as sounding
like a goose honking. However, any trachea-bronchial
inflammation/irritation can produce a similar sounding
cough. Often, the coughing occurs during the night or
when the dog first starts to move around upon waking. It
also commonly occurs with excitement or exercise.
Diagnosis
Chronic bronchitis is a diagnosis of exclusion. Other diseases can cause clinical signs
similar to chronic bronchitis. These include tracheal collapse, laryngeal paralysis, lung
diseases, lung cancer, heart failure, heartworm disease and infectious causes of acute
bronchitis (listed above). Your veterinarian will likely attempt to rule out many of these
causes with a history, physical examination, and additional testing.
Diagnostic tests that are used to establish a diagnosis of chronic bronchitis include chest
x-rays (thoracic radiographs), airway endoscopy (passing a small camera into the larynx,
trachea and bronchi), collecting samples from the lower airways for culture and analysis of
the cells in the airways (broncho-alveolar lavage or a transtracheal washing), and
sometimes even echocardiography (examining the heart using ultrasound). A fecal
analysis might be needed to rule out parasites.

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952974&ind=484&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Treatment
Once a diagnosis of chronic bronchitis is made, your veterinarian will generally treat this
condition with a variety of medications.
There are several things to remember about treating chronic bronchitis:
The cough in chronic bronchitis is unlikely to completely disappear. The aim is
to reduce the coughing by more than 70-80%, and to reduce the severity of the
coughing fits.
Coughing begets coughing – the more a dog coughs, the more they irritate their
airways, which stimulates more coughing. Therefore, the aim is to initially
break the coughing cycle.
Treatment of chronic bronchitis generally relies on using a combination of medications:
Corticosteroids. These drugs are the main therapy for chronic bronchitis. They
reduce and suppress the inflammation in the airways. They can be given orally
(pills) or with an inhaler. Specific canine inhalers are required to properly
administer steroids.
Certain antibiotics, such as doxycycline, minocycline, or azithromycin may be
given to rule out common infectious agents of the airways. These particular
antibiotics also have an anti-inflammatory effect, and may decrease coughing
even if there aren't any infectious agents.
Cough suppressants. These are usually narcotic-based preparations that
require a prescription. They sometimes need to be given to the point of
sedating the dog, especially early in treatment.
Bronchodilators. These may help by relaxing the airways, allowing air to move
more easily into and out of the lungs. They can be given orally, by nebulizer, or
by inhalers.
Your veterinarian might prescribe a combination of these drugs, and alter the doses as the
disease is controlled to minimize side effects while still maintaining good control of the
coughing.
An important factor in successful therapy of chronic bronchitis is weight loss. If your pet is
overweight, a loss of even 5-10% of the body weight can dramatically improve the
coughing. When the dog is overweight, improving your dog’s condition is completely in
your hands; therefore, your veterinarian might prescribe a weight-loss program for your
pet in addition to the medications.
Your veterinarian might also ask you to keep a “coughing log” to keep track of the severity
and frequency of coughing, as this can help determine how successful the treatment is.
Prognosis
The prognosis for treating chronic bronchitis is good. However, because this condition
generally occurs in older dogs, other causes of chronic coughing (listed above) might
complicate the management. If coughing persists or recurs despite appropriate therapy,
your veterinarian might be required to pursue other causes, or refer you to a specialist for
additional diagnostic tests.
Co-authored by Dr. Mark Rishniw, ACVIM, and Dr. Rosie Henik, ACVIM

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952974&ind=484&objTypeID=1007 2/3
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952974&pid=19239
eec163cc-d60d-4082-b47c-b33d8b01227d.1754288672
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:54 AM Chronic Bronchitis in Dogs is Neither Infectious nor Contagious - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952974&ind=484&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Chest radiograph from a cat with chylothorax. The "white out" is
fluid (chyle) filling up the chest cavity. On a radiograph, any fluid in
the chest will look white. When the fluid is withdrawn and inspected
directly, the fluid may be any number of colors. As it happens, chyle
actually is white. Image courtesy MarVistaVet.
Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 25, 2023
Published: October 21, 2006
First, the Basics
Let us consider the chest cavity for a
moment. The chest can also be
called the thorax and the chest cavity
is sometimes called the thoracic
cavity. The thorax houses the lungs
and heart as well as some other
structures such as nerves, large
blood vessels, and other conduits
(such as the esophagus transporting
food through the chest and into the
stomach on the abdominal side of the
diaphragm) but the main residents of
the chest are the heart and lungs.
The lungs are the focus of this topic.
The diaphragm and rib muscles
extend and contract to draw breath
into the lungs and expel it again. In
many ways, the lungs are like
sponges filled with air. Life depends
on the ability of their small chambers to expand with new air and contract to expel used
air. There is not a lot of extra room inside the chest cavity, so when something (such as
fluid) starts taking up space in the chest, the lungs do not have room to inflate to their
natural capacity. Breathing becomes hard work, and the patient’s focus becomes
expanding the lung against limited space, sort of like trying to blow up a balloon that is too
stiff. The fluid inside the chest cavity is called "pleural effusion." This fluid is not actually
inside the lungs and generally does not lead to coughing or sputtering; it instead
surrounds the lungs, making lung expansion difficult, leading to shallow rapid breaths and
recruitment of the abdominal muscles to lend strength to the act of breathing.
Types of Fluids
There are many types of fluids that can accumulate in the chest cavity. When the fluid is
blood, the problem is called hemothorax. When the fluid is pus, the problem is called
pyothorax. When the fluid is actually air, the problem is pneumothorax. When the fluid is
lymph, the problem is called chylothorax. With chylothorax, the fluid is milky when it is
drained from the chest, and its whiteness is from fat. Chylothorax represents a specific
problem and requires specific therapy.
Initial Tests

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952543&ind=485&objTypeID=1007 1/4
The effort the patient is making to breathe will probably be the first sign of trouble, and
upon seeing this, your veterinarian is likely to recommend radiographs. On those, fluid in
the chest will be obvious. From there, the chest will need to be tapped with a needle and
the fluid drained. This will create some relief for the patient as the lung will once again be
able to expand. The fluid will most likely need to be sent to the lab for testing to determine
the type. If the patient is too distressed for radiographs, the chest may be immediately
tapped to see if there is fluid pressure that can be relieved. After the fluid has been
removed from the chest, new radiographs are often taken to see if there are any
structures (such as masses or heart chamber enlargements) that have become visible
now that the overlying fluid is gone.
What is Lymph?
Part of the circulatory path of lymphatic fluid involves certain lymph vessels of the GI tract
called lacteals, which are involved in the absorption of dietary fat. Because of this influx of
fat, lymphatic fluid is milky white. Lymphatic fluid/chyle contains fat, water, and
lymphocytes (cells of the immune system). We all know what blood is. We all know that
blood circulates in veins and arteries and is moved by the pumping action of the heart. In
fact, there is another circulatory system in the body: the lymphatic system. Lymphatic fluid,
also called "lymph" or "chyle," represents extra fluid draining between the cells of the
body, gradually channeling into lymph vessels. The fluid is moved in these vessels by the
natural movement of the body's muscles, and on its way, it picks up assorted cellular
debris and carries it along its route like driftwood. Lymph fluid (and its cellular driftwood)
circulates through the lymph nodes, where cells of the immune system are exposed to the
driftwood. In this way, the immune system sees the remnants of infection, tumor cells,
foreign organisms, etc., and can react appropriately. Some immune cells circulate in the
lymphatic fluid, facilitating the immune reaction and participating in the body's defense.
When something goes wrong with the circulation of the lymph fluid and back pressure is
created, lymph fluid can leak out and accumulate in the chest.
When the Diagnosis is Chylothorax
If there is a reason for the chyle build-up, it is important to find that reason. Often
(especially in cats), the reason is heart disease. Heart disease generally interferes with
lymphatic drainage, and poor drainage leads to chyle build up, but there can be other
reasons for chyle buildup besides heart disease. Any sort of mass or growth in the chest
could also be responsible. If a cause can be found, then it should be addressed if
possible. If no cause can be found, then the condition is termed idiopathic and is simply
managed either medically or surgically. An echocardiogram/ultrasound of the chest is
almost always needed to rule out chest masses and assess the patient for heart disease.
Most cases of chylothorax are idiopathic.
Breeds that seem predisposed include Siamese and Himalayan cats, and Afghan hound
and Shiba Inu dogs.
Cats are diagnosed with chylothorax approximately four times as often as dogs.
When the Diagnosis is Idiopathic Chylothorax
There are several options for treatment, though they have pros and cons. The most
conservative method is medical management. This means that whenever the patient
seems to be having some distress, the chest fluid is drained (see video of a fluid drain).
How often this is necessary is highly individual, but every few weeks is a common interval.
In time, after many taps, scarring can build up to cause the fluid to loculate, which means
that small pockets of fluid form rather than one drainable area. This makes tapping more
difficult over time. Other problems with periodic tapping are the potential to introduce an

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952543&ind=485&objTypeID=1007 2/4
infection with the needle stick and the fact that chyle is an inflammatory fluid that can, over
a long time, create some problematic scarring between the chest wall and the lung. This is
called restrictive or fibrosing pleuritis and is definitely something to avoid (see below).
A supplement called rutin may help. Rutin is available in vitamin stores and acts to
stimulate cells called macrophages to carry away some of the fat in the chyle. In some
individuals, this supplement is helpful in reducing the amount of chyle build-up.
Another treatment involves somatostatin, a chemical normally produced in the brain to
regulate intestinal hormone and enzyme secretion. One of its effects is to reduce chyle
flow through the thoracic duct. A commercial product can be used in pets, but its use
should be considered somewhat experimental.
A low-fat diet (approximately 6 percent fat on a dry matter basis) is generally also used in
conjunction with the above. Medical management such as this is often recommended
before surgery, as some cases of chylothorax will spontaneously resolve.
Treatment
In many cases, the cause of chylothorax cannot be defined. In this situation, chylothorax
is said to be idiopathic, and it must be treated without the benefit of treating its underlying
cause. There are several options for treatment, though they have pros and cons. The
most conservative method is medical management. This means that whenever the patient
seems to be having some distress, the chest fluid is drained. How often this is necessary
is highly individual, but every few weeks is a common interval. In time, after many taps,
scarring can build up to cause the fluid to loculate, which means that small pockets of fluid
form rather than one drainable area. This makes tapping more difficult over time.
A supplement that may help is called rutin. Rutin is available in vitamin stores and acts to
stimulate cells called macrophages to carry away some of the fat in the chyle. In some
individuals, this supplement is helpful in reducing the amount of chyle build-up.
A low-fat diet (approximately 6% fat on a dry matter basis) is generally also used in
conjunction with the above. Medical management such as this is often recommended
before surgery, as some cases of chylothorax will spontaneously resolve.
More permanent solutions require surgery.
Thoracic Duct Ligation and Pericardiectomy
The thoracic duct is the largest lymph vessel in the body, and it runs alongside the aorta
(the largest artery in the body) through the chest. Lymph fluid flows through it on the way
to the subclavian artery, where it dumps into the bloodstream. When the thoracic duct is
tied off, lymph fluid must find other channels for circulation, and the flow of lymph through
the chest is greatly reduced. Ligation (tying off) of the thoracic duct resolves the
chylothorax in approximately 50% of dogs and less than 40% of cats. See a video
of thoracic duct ligation in a cat.
Success is hugely increased by stripping the pericardium from around the heart.
The pericardium is the fibrous sac containing the heart. When it is bathed in chyle, it
becomes thickened and may slightly constrict the low-pressure right side of the heart. This
causes increased pressure on the right side of the heart, which in turn causes increased
pressure in the lymphatics. Stripping the pericardium relieves this pressure, and when
thoracic duct ligation is combined with pericardiectomy, chylothorax resolved in 100% (10
out of 10) dogs studied and in 80% of cats studied. This is now the surgery of choice for
chylothorax in cats and dogs.
Cisterna Chyle Ablation

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952543&ind=485&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The cisterna chyle is a structure where lymph collects just before it flows into the thoracic
duct. The removal or destruction of the cisterna chyle further diverts lymph flow away from
the chest. This procedure is generally reserved for patients who did not find success with
thoracic duct ligation/pericardiectomy.
Complications
It can take up to 50 days to realize the benefits of surgery for chylothorax. Some animals
simply will not achieve adequate resolution, and some (as many as 30% of dogs) will
resolve their chylothorax only to develop some other type of chest fluid. The simple use of
prednisone as an anti-inflammatory measure can resolve such fluid in as many as 60% of
dogs, though it takes four to six weeks. If this is ineffective or a more rapid solution is
needed, a port can be surgically placed under the skin to allow for easy fluid drainage, or
a pump can similarly be placed to allow the owner to pump fluid from the chest into the
abdomen.
Beware of Fibrosing Pleuritis
Chyle in the chest is irritating to the local tissue; the lungs can develop scarring from being
in contact with chyle. Scarring prevents the lungs from expanding normally even after the
chyle is removed. The only treatment is to surgically remove the scar tissue using a
procedure called decortication, a process fraught with complications if the lungs are
diffusely affected. If both lungs must be decorticated, it is common for life-threatening
pulmonary edema to occur as the lungs try to re-expand. Sometimes, air leaks out of the
lungs and fills the chest with air (pneumothorax). Before opting for any surgical treatment
of idiopathic chylothorax, this potential complicating factor should be discussed with the
surgeon.
Surgical treatment of chylothorax is something that not all veterinarians are comfortable
performing. Discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a specialist would be best
for you and your pet.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952543&pid=19239
eec163cc-d60d-4082-b47c-b33d8b01227d.1754288696
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Chylothorax is more Common in Cats than Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952543&ind=485&objTypeID=1007 4/4
Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Published: September 15, 2020
The diaphragm is a thin muscle that separates the organs in the chest (heart, lungs) from
the organs in the abdomen. It is also involved in breathing: when the diaphragm contracts,
it helps pull air into the lungs.
A hernia develops when an organ pushes through a weak spot in the muscle around it,
creating a hole.
Diaphragmatic hernias result from abdominal organs (e.g. liver, stomach, intestines) being
pushed through a hole in the diaphragm. That hole is the hernia. The hole can be caused
by trauma, such as being hit by a car, or it can be congenital, meaning that the pet was
born with it.
Peritoneopericardial Diaphragmatic Hernia
A certain type of defect that has a big name - peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia -
is not nearly as complicated as it sounds. As we know, the diaphragm is a muscle that
runs between the chest and abdomen. It helps us breathe by affecting the communication
between the double-walled sac that contains the heart and the membrane that lines the
belly. The heart sac is called the pericardium and the membrane is called the peritoneum.
What happens with this type of hernia is that abdominal organs can move through the
hole in the diaphragm directly into the heart sac. Obviously, abdominal organs are not
supposed to be in the heart sac. Usually cats and dogs are born with this type of hernia,
but trauma can also cause it.
Diaphragmatic Hernia Symptoms
When the abdominal organs have moved through the hole in the diaphragm, they become
trapped and lose their blood supply. Misplaced organs in the chest can also crowd the
lungs, or in the case of peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias they can crowd the
heart, preventing pets from breathing normally or letting the heartbeat correctly.
Symptoms can include coughing, poor appetite, laying around more, trouble breathing or
taking rapid and short breaths, fever, and collapse. In some cases, pets can live for many
years without any symptoms, especially if the abdominal organs are able to move easily in
and out of the chest or the hole is too small to allow movement through it. Such hernias
may be found unexpectedly while addressing another problem.
Diagnosing a Hernia
For diagnosis, the veterinarian will perform a thorough physical examination. Sometimes a
veterinarian will become suspicious when they hear tummy grumbles in the chest instead
of in the belly. X-rays of hernias often show abdominal contents in the chest, or unusual
gas patterns or shadows. If the X-rays don’t show an obvious answer, the veterinarian
may give an ultrasound or they may choose a barium series, in which they feed the pet a
type of medicine called barium to highlight the stomach and intestines on additional Xrays.
Treatment

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=9808794&ind=486&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Treatment requires surgery to fix the hole in the diaphragm (and heart for
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernias) and move the abdominal organs back into the
belly. If the organs are severely damaged from being trapped in the chest, surgery to fix
the damage or remove the entire organ may also be necessary.
Unfortunately, diaphragmatic hernia repair carries some risk because the diaphragm helps
us breathe. Because of this risk, some veterinarians will avoid surgery in pets that do not
show symptoms. The issue with waiting until symptoms occur to perform a risky surgery
means that organ damage may be irreparable by the time surgery is performed, so it is
important to fully discuss the pros and cons of a wait-and-see approach with your
veterinarian.
For pets that do undergo surgical repair, once the pet has fully recovered and healed from
surgery, they are unlikely to experience future issues.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9808794&pid=19239
eec163cc-d60d-4082-b47c-b33d8b01227d.1754288723
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Diaphragmatic Hernias in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=9808794&ind=486&objTypeID=1007 2/2
Some e-cigarettes can be reused. Photo by VIN
Some e-cigarettes are disposable. Photo by VIN
Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets
Sharon M. Gwaltney-Brant, DVM, PhD, DABT, DABVT
Published: March 31, 2014
Electronic cigarettes, often called e-cigs, are marketed as an alternative to cigarette
smoking. They are also referred to as personal vaporizers or electronic nicotine delivery
systems. These devices have a cylindrical body that holds a cartridge containing a liquid
solution; some resemble tobacco cigarettes. The solution, termed “e-liquid” or “e-juice,”
contains a base material, flavoring compounds, and nicotine. The base material is
generally propylene glycol and either vegetable glycerin or polyethylene glycol.
Glycerin and propylene glycol are of low
toxicity when eaten, but the amount in the
refill bottles (usually 10-30% of what's in the
bottle) is low enough to not be much of a
concern; nicotine is the bigger issue.
Whether any of the compounds used are
toxic if inhaled long term is not known.
The nicotine levels in these e-liquids can
vary in concentration from being completely
nicotine-free up to 36 milligrams per milliliter
(mg/mL) of nicotine. For marketing
purposes, the “/mL” part is frequently
dropped, and the e-liquids are advertised as
having X mg of nicotine rather than X
mg/mL. In some e-cigs, the user controls the
amount of nicotine delivered by adjusting the
flow of e-liquid from the cartridge.
An e-cig with a full cartridge can contain up
to 36 mg of nicotine, which doesn’t sound
like a lot until you factor in how toxic nicotine
is. Clinical signs of nicotine poisoning can
be seen in dogs and cats exposed to a mere
0.5 mg per pound of body weight. For cats
and small dogs, ingesting 20 mg of nicotine
can be lethal.
Even more dangerous are the bottles of eliquid that are used to recharge the e-cig
cartridge: the nicotine in these bottles can
range from 10 mL to 60 mL or more. So a 30-mL bottle of 36 mg/mL e-liquid will contain
1080 mg of nicotine, more than enough to prove fatal for even a very large dog if the
contents are ingested.
Nicotine is readily absorbed by ingestion as
well as through the skin. Pets may be
exposed when they chew up the e-cigs or

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=6176173&ind=487&objTypeID=1007 1/3
E-juice is bottled. Photo by VIN
the bottles containing e-juice or even when
they walk through puddles of spilled e-juice
and get it on their paws. The signs of
nicotine poisoning may begin within 15 to 30
minutes of exposure to the e-liquid; in
contrast, signs of nicotine poisoning
following eating tobacco products may take
a few hours as the nicotine must be released
from the tobacco.
The first signs normally seen with toxic
exposure to nicotine include:
Excessive drooling (hypersalivation)
Vomiting with or without diarrhea
Agitation or restlessness
Increased respiratory rate or panting.
With severe intoxications, signs may progress to include:
Excitation
Disorientation
Tremors
Twitching
Convulsions or seizures
Increased heart rate
Increased blood pressure.
Further progression of signs may result in profound weakness, paralysis, abnormal heart
rhythms (including cardiac arrest), hypotension, coma, and death.
Prompt and aggressive veterinary care is required to successfully manage poisoning from
e-juice exposure. Because the e-juice is rapidly absorbed across the mucous membranes
of the mouth, standard decontamination measures such as inducing vomiting are usually
not helpful. Treatment includes managing convulsions and seizures, treating heart and
blood pressure abnormalities, ensuring adequate respiration, and providing intravenous
fluids to enhance nicotine elimination.
The prognosis for patients exposed to large amounts of nicotine can be quite grave
depending on how quickly veterinary care is obtained, and even with aggressive
veterinary care, some patients will not survive.
The ASPCA National Animal Poison Control is available 24 hours a day at 888-426-
4435. Expect an initial consultation fee of around $100.00 and additional follow-up is
at no charge. You will be assigned a case number your veterinarian can use to
communicate with a toxicology specialist before beginning treatment.
If your pet has a HomeAgain microchip, a free poison control consultation is included
in the full-service registration. Call 1-888-466-3242.
https://www.homeagain.com/our-services/emergency-medical-hotline
https://www.aspca.org/pet-care/animal-poison-control
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=6176173&pid=19239
eec163cc-d60d-4082-b47c-b33d8b01227d.1754288746

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=6176173&ind=487&objTypeID=1007 2/3
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:55 AM Electronic Cigarettes are Toxic to Pets - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=6176173&ind=487&objTypeID=1007 3/3
Intervention for Choking in an Unconscious Dog: XXT –
eXternal eXtraction Technique
Robin Van Metre, VMD; Dennis T. (Tim) Crowe, Jr., DVM, Diplomate ACVS Emeritus, Charter Diplomate
ACVECC, FCCM; KaLee Pasek, DVM; Jo-Anne Brenner, EMT-Tactical, NREMT-I, K9 MEDIC® Executive
Director and Founder
Revised: January 11, 2024
Published: December 12, 2018
Current treatment for choking (airway obstruction) in dogs includes performing the
Heimlich maneuver (abdominal thrusts), removal with forceps, performing a finger sweep
(in an unconscious patient), or rescue breathing. Advanced airway techniques (surgical
cricothyrotomy) may be an option in a veterinary clinic, or with adequate prehospital
training in the field.
The eXternal eXtraction Technique™ (XXT™) is a safer, more effective
treatment/intervention for choking in an unconscious dog. The authors do not have
experiential evidence using this technique in cats.
Although true choking (complete airway obstruction) has been considered uncommon, the
authors are aware of many reported cases of fatal airway obstructions during training or
play sessions. There are also reports of pet owners suffering injuries including finger
amputations attempting to retrieve an object from the back of a dog’s throat. Working dogs
are particularly high risk due to their high drive and intense focus on rewards.
Prevention
Choking on a ball or similar object may be avoided by adequate safety precautions. The
size and shape of toys and ball rewards should be evaluated before offering them to your
pet. Balls and Kongs should be checked for damage, cracks, etc. Supervision is
recommended for balls, Kongs, and chews.
    
Click on the image below to see the video procedure.
0:00

8/4/25, 11:56 AM Intervention for Choking in an Unconscious Dog: XXT – eXternal eXtraction Technique - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=8871225&ind=488&objTypeID=1007 1/2


XXT™ PullGrip Alternative
It is valuable to know that there is also an alternate approach to the eXternal eXtraction
technique. The PullGrip approach should not be used unless the dog can be placed in a
stabilized position with its head in an “In-Line Position” with the airway parallel to the floor
-- nose, ears, and spine all in a line. This alternate technique may be more effective for
responders with reduced thumb strength.
XXT™ Procedure (Expand this section to see the step-by-step instructions.)
XXT™ Procedure with the PullGrip Alternative (Expand this section to see
the step-by-step instructions.)
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=8871225&pid=19239
eec163cc-d60d-4082-b47c-b33d8b01227d.1754288775
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:56 AM Intervention for Choking in an Unconscious Dog: XXT – eXternal eXtraction Technique - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=8871225&ind=488&objTypeID=1007 2/2
NO SWIMMING EVER AFTER SURGERY! Image Courtesy Lori Shriver
Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 16, 2024
Published: June 19, 2006
See the article Summary below:
Most of us know the larynx is
commonly known as the voice box
and is located in the throat. We
know that laryngitis is a condition
where one cannot speak, but
other than that, the larynx does
not get much thought. It is a vastly
underappreciated organ. The
larynx is not just where the sound
comes from; it is, more
importantly, the cap of the
respiratory tract's tubing. The
larynx closes the respiratory tract off while we eat and drink so that we do not inhale our
food. If we need to take a deep breath, the muscles of the larynx expand and open for us.
The larynx is the guardian of the airways, keeping whatever we want to swallow out and
directing air in.
Laryngeal paralysis results when the abductor muscles of the larynx cannot work properly.
This means no expanding and opening of the larynx for a deep breath; the laryngeal folds
simply flop weakly and flaccidly. In other words, when you need a deep breath, you don't
get one. This can create tremendous anxiety. imagine attempting to take a deep breath
and finding that you simply cannot. Anxiety leads to more rapid, deep breathing attempts
and more distress. A respiratory crisis from the partial obstruction can emerge, creating an
emergency and even death.
Laryngeal paralysis does not come about suddenly. For most dogs, there is a fairly long
history of panting, easily tiring on walks, or loud raspy breathing. Ideally, the diagnosis can
be made before the condition progresses to an emergency.
Dogs with laryngeal paralysis demonstrate some or all of the following signs:
Excess panting
Exercise intolerance
Voice change
Raspy breathing sounds
Respiratory gasping or distress
The usual patient is an older, large-breed dog; the most commonly affected breed is the
Labrador retriever. The condition can occur in cats, but it is rare. The Bouvier des
Flandres has a hereditary form of laryngeal paralysis that is able to affect young dogs.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952489&ind=489&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Other breeds reported to have early-onset genetic laryngeal paralysis include Siberian
Husky, Great Pyrenees, bull terrier, and Dalmatian.
Is Laryngeal Paralysis Part of a Bigger Neurologic Problem?
The time for ambiguity regarding this question has passed, and the answer is a definite
yes. Laryngeal paralysis is now considered to be the first symptom of a much more
pervasive neurologic weakness, hence the new name of the condition, "Geriatric Onset
Laryngeal Paralysis and Polyneuropathy." In time, the leg muscles will become weak and
uncoordinated, leading to debilitating mobility problems. In addition, the esophagus (the
tube that carries food from the throat to the stomach) will lose normal function, creating a
risk of inhalation of food material. This can progress to a completely flaccid esophagus
called a megaesophagus, a condition that requires high maintenance management to
prevent aspiration pneumonia and provide proper food delivery.
The good news is that the average patient with acquired laryngeal paralysis is at least 10
years old, and the progression of the neurologic weakness is fairly slow. This means many
patients will live their normal lifespan before further neurologic weakness becomes a
problem. We can still say, however, that dogs with laryngeal paralysis are 21 times more
likely to develop a megaesophagus than dogs without laryngeal paralysis. Also, if one
knows that progressive muscle weakness is coming, one can be proactive with exercise
and physical therapy to help maintain mobility as long as possible.
It's been suggested that hypothyroidism may be a cause of laryngeal paralysis. In fact, it is
not. Hypothyroidism is associated with other neuropathies that could complicate the
polyneuropathy of which laryngeal paralysis is a part. This means hypothyroidism should
be identified and treated, but while improvement in weakness, etc., may be seen, the
laryngeal paralysis will not reverse with thyroid hormone supplementation.
Making the Diagnosis
To determine if a dog has laryngeal paralysis, the larynx must be examined under
sedation. The level of sedation must be heavy enough to allow the larynx to be inspected
but light enough for the patient to take some deep breaths. If the sedation is too deep for
the diagnosis to be obvious, a respiratory stimulant called Dopram® (doxapram
hydrochloride) is given intravenously. This is to stimulate several deep breaths so that the
function of the larynx is clear. In a normal larynx, the arytenoid cartilages are seen to open
and close widely. In a paralyzed larynx, they just sit there limply while the patient breathes
deeply.
If the patient is having a respiratory crisis when seeing the veterinarian, this diagnostic
test can easily be followed by intubation, inserting a breathing tube down the patient’s
throat. This relieves the upper airway obstruction, and the patient can breathe normally.
Unfortunately, sedation must be maintained to keep the tube in place. This potentially
poses a problem when the patient must wake up, and the tube must be eventually
removed. If waking up involves too much respiratory motion, the patient may have to be
re-sedated and the tube put back in until another attempt at waking can be managed.
A newer technique of visualizing the larynx involves threading an endoscope down the
patient’s nostril. This is tricky, but the benefit is that sedation is not required. The downside
is that specialized equipment is needed, and the patient may not be cooperative.
Additional Testing
There are some additional tests that are helpful in evaluating the patient with laryngeal
paralysis. Chest radiographs are important in ruling out aspiration pneumonia (from
inhaling food material through the non-functional larynx), megaesophagus (which we have
mentioned tremendously complicates a laryngeal paralysis case), and obvious tumor
spread. Radiographs of the throat to rule out obvious throat tumors are also helpful.
Complete blood testing, including thyroid tests, should also be included in the workup.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952489&ind=489&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Canine Larynx Diagram
Conservative Treatment
Treatment of laryngeal paralysis is most likely going to require surgery, but not everyone is
ready or able to provide a surgical solution for their dog. Here are some tips for nonsurgical management:
Change from collar to harness to avoid pressure on the larynx.
Avoid heat or other situations where the dog might pant.
Reduce activity (also to reduce panting)
Tranquilizers or anti-anxiety medications may have benefits.
The Crisis
If laryngeal paralysis is not treated, a respiratory
crisis can emerge. In this situation, the patient
attempts to breathe deeply and simply cannot,
creating a vicious cycle of anxiety and respiratory
attempts. The laryngeal folds become swollen,
making the throat obstruction still worse. The
patient’s gums become bluish from lack of oxygen,
and the patient begins to overheat. For reasons that
remain unclear, fluid begins to flood the lungs, and
the patient begins to drown (as if the laryngeal
obstruction wasn’t lethal enough).
The patient must be sedated, intubated, and cooled
down with water to survive. As soon as intubation is
in place, the patient can breathe normally, oxygen
can be given, and the crisis can be curtailed if it has
not progressed too far.
Of course, eventually, the patient will have to wake
up and be able to survive without medical
equipment. Corticosteroids can be used to reduce
the swelling, but ideally, one of several surgical
solutions is needed.
Surgical Solutions
The goal of surgery, whichever technique is used, is
to relieve the airway obstruction permanently while
maintaining the original function of the larynx
(protection of the airways).
Laryngeal Tieback (also called Lateralization Surgery)
This has probably become the most commonly performed surgery for laryngeal paralysis. It
involves placing a couple of sutures in such a way as to pull one of the arytenoid cartilages
backward. By repositioning one of the arytenoids, the opening of the larynx is made larger.
The chief complication is that only a few millimeters of position change in the arytenoids
are needed. If the cartilage is moved too much, the larynx cannot properly close, and
aspiration pneumonia becomes a substantial risk. Commonly, these patients have a
persistent cough after eating or drinking. This surgery has been associated with a 14
percent postoperative mortality rate. (Years ago, both arytenoids were tied back to create a
still larger larynx, but tying off both cartilages in this way was associated with a 67%
mortality rate, so it is no longer done.)
Partial Arytenoidectomy
Another surgical technique involves only biting out one vocal fold and also biting out the
arytenoid cartilage on the same side. There is more bleeding with this technique, and a

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952489&ind=489&objTypeID=1007 3/5
tracheostomy becomes more desirable. Surgeries involving removing part of the larynx
have been associated with a 30% mortality rate in laryngeal paralysis patients.
Ventriculocordectomy (De-Barking)
De-barking surgery is generally thought of as a surgical solution to a behavioral problem,
but it is also a fair treatment for laryngeal paralysis. The usual method involves extending a
long “biting” forceps down the throat and biting out the vocal folds. Anesthesia is required
to do this, and the fact that the surgical area is the larynx makes normal intubation for
anesthesia impossible. This means either using injectable anesthesia or placing a
tracheostomy (cutting a hole in the throat lower down) and intubating through that.
Removing the vocal folds also removes the patient’s voice, reducing barking to a whisper.
The hole created by the absence of the vocal folds makes for a larger airway opening and
is generally large enough to relieve the obstruction. Complications of this surgery include
swelling and bleeding (which can obstruct themselves, though, if a tracheostomy is placed,
any such obstruction is bypassed) and regrowth of a webbing of vocal tissue. An alternative
technique involves approaching the larynx from the outside of the throat instead of down
the mouth. This method is more difficult and time-consuming, but less likely to develop
webbing. A tracheostomy, if any, is allowed to heal closed.
Castellation
In this surgery, a square of the thyroid cartilage is cut (similar to a castle’s turret's square
behind which an archer might hide). This square is moved forward and reattached to create
a wider laryngeal opening. A tracheostomy is frequently needed to protect from swelling.
Stenting
Another concept for treating laryngeal paralysis uses implanted devices to maintain an
open airway. These methods are still being studied, and none have been proven safe and
effective yet.
One type of stent is a spring-like metallic implant designed to push the laryngeal cartilages
into a more open position. Another type uses a silicone tube inserted into the larynx and
upper windpipe. While there may be individual clinics promoting these devices, there is
little scientific validation as yet, and caution is warranted. There have been a few small
studies suggesting at least a possible role for using the silicone tube stent as a temporary
treatment before surgical treatment with a tie-back procedure, but it is recommended to go
immediately to the tie-back operation if possible.
Post-Operative Considerations
There are some special concerns after laryngeal surgery, regardless of the procedure:
The patient must be restricted from barking for 2-3 weeks. Tranquilizers may be
needed to effect this.
Expect a reduced volume in the patient's bark.
Some gagging and coughing are normal during eating and drinking. This tends
to reduce or resolve with time, but initially, dry foods should be avoided, and
multiple small meals of canned "meatballs" are fed.
No swimming ever! The patient's airway protection is compromised with
laryngeal surgery, and many dogs will swim with their mouths open. The risk of
water aspiration is too great.
Aspiration Pneumonia
While only about 10 percent of dogs being evaluated for surgical correction of laryngeal
paralysis already have aspiration pneumonia, nearly 25% will develop it at some point.
Pneumonia is always potentially life-threatening, and aspiration pneumonia is particularly
difficult to clear since it involves large, contaminated food particles in the lung. Broad-

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952489&ind=489&objTypeID=1007 4/5
spectrum antibiotics, fluid therapy, and physical therapy are important tools, but sadly, the
underlying condition that led to the original aspiration pneumonia is likely to produce future
episodes.
In Summary:
The larynx, or “voice box”, is located at the top of the trachea. It is the
organ humans use to speak and dogs to bark.
It is the cap of the respiratory tract, opening to bring in air and closing
when we eat or drink, so that we do not inhale food.
Laryngeal paralysis (inability to move) results when the muscles of the
larynx cannot work correctly, and this means less air reaches the lungs.
Being unable to breathe causes anxiety and distress, which can elevate
the situation to an emergency or even death.
Most dogs show signs of laryngeal distress before paralysis. These signs
include excess panting, exercise intolerance, voice change, raspy
breathing sounds, and respiratory distress.
Older, large-breed dogs are most affected. The condition can be genetic in
some breeds.
Laryngeal paralysis is thought to be an early symptom of a larger
neurological disease called Geriatric Onset Laryngeal Paralysis and
Polyneuropathy. Dogs with laryngeal paralysis may also be affected by
megaesophagus, a condition in which the esophagus loses normal muscle
function, which, in turn, allows food to be inhaled, resulting in pneumonia.
In addition, leg muscles may also be affected, causing generalized
weakness.
Diagnosis is made by examination of the larynx under sedation.
X-rays are taken if pneumonia is suspected and to rule out other issues
like tumors in the throat or lungs.
Laryngeal paralysis must be treated to avoid a respiratory crisis.
Conservative treatments include reducing activity and switching out your
dog’s collar for a harness that does not press on the throat.
Surgery is the most recommended solution, and there are several options.
Back to top
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952489&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754288995
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Laryngeal Paralysis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952489&ind=489&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Nebulizer Use for Dogs and Cats
Kathy J. Morris-Stilwell, DVM
Published: December 20, 2017
Dogs, cats, and other pets who develop lung diseases such as pneumonia, asthma,
kennel cough, bronchitis, and so on can benefit from a nebulizer delivering saline,
albuterol, antibiotics, or other drugs. A nebulizer is a machine that aerosolizes medicine
into a fine mist; it's like spraying medicine. A face mask is held over the pet's muzzle (most
pets can learn to accept the face mask) so that medication is inhaled deep into the
respiratory tract.
The esophagus lies above the trachea and is protected by the epiglottis. Pneumonia may
result from infections caused by kennel cough, viruses and bacteria. Pets with
megaesophagus are prone to developing aspiration pneumonia because they tend to
regurgitate food and fluids into the back of the throat and then aspirate the material into
the lungs.
A nebulizer can be purchased from human medical supply stores, online, or from eBay.
There are several good nebulizer brands, such as Pulmo-Aide, Omron, Devilbiss, etc.
Make sure that you obtain the compressor (the machine), tubing, and the medication cup.
The tubing, T-piece (a t-shaped tube that attaches the machine to the pet and to an exit)
and medicine cup are called a nebulizer kit.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Nebulizer Use for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5860662&ind=490&objTypeID=1007 1/4
A dog receives a nebulizer treatment. Photo by Dr. Kathy Morris-Stilwell.
Copyright by VIN
A vaporizer is not the same as a nebulizer. A vaporizer is typically used for sinus or upper
respiratory issues rather than lung issues. Vaporized droplets are too big to get as deeply
into the lungs the way nebulized particles
You can purchase an appropriately sized mask from a veterinarian, or make one yourself.
Using a Nebulizer
Follow these steps to use a
nebulizer.
1. Plug in the
compressor.
2. Insert one end of the
tubing into the
compressor and the
other end into the cup.
3. Place the correct dose
of the medicine in the
medicine cup.
4. Start the compressor.
a. Keep the cup up
straight and hold the
mask up to your pet's
face. You might want to
practice placing the mask against the pet's face before using the nebulizer.
b. Put a little canned dog/cat food, baby food, cream cheese or peanut butter

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Nebulizer Use for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5860662&ind=490&objTypeID=1007 2/4
inside of the mask and allow the pet to lick it. This can also distract a pet while
the treatment is proceeding.
5. After 5 to 10 minutes, you'll see and hear that the medicine is running out.
6. Shake the cup downward a few times to make sure all the medicine has come
through.
7. Take apart the plastic parts of the nebulizer and wash all the parts.
View a nebulization demonstration video.
Cleaning the Nebulizer
Bacteria and viruses can live and reproduce in a nebulizer that is not routinely cleaned.
After each use, swish each piece in warm running water. At the end of the day, after you
use it the last time, scrub each piece with warm soapy water. Rinse each piece under
warm running water. Let each piece air-dry on a clean dish towel or paper towel. When
the pieces are completely dry, put the nebulizer back together. If not using for a period of
time, store it in a clean, dry bag.
Twice each week, or after the treatment is completed, mix a half cup of white vinegar with
1.5 cups of tap water. Soak each piece in this mixture for one hour. Rinse each piece
under warm running water. Let each piece air-dry on a clean dish towel or a paper towel.
When the pieces are completely dry, reassemble the nebulizer.
What do I do if I have Cleaned my Nebulizer and the Tubing is still Wet?
The easy way to dry the tubing is to attach it to the compressor. Then switch on the
machine, and let it run for a minute or two. The blowing air will dry out the tubing. Use a
paper towel or clean hand towel to dry the other parts.
What Medications can be Given with a Nebulizer?
A variety of drugs can be given using a nebulizer: bronchodilators like albuterol (open up
the bronchioles allowing debris to more easily be removed from the lungs), steroids,
water-soluble antibiotics, saline, N-acetylcysteine, etc. Albuterol opens up the bronchioles,
making it easier to breath and allowing antibiotics to get deeper within the lungs. As
albuterol can increase the heart rate, it should be used with caution in dogs with heart
disease. Do not exceed three treatments per day unless advised by your veterinarian. The
dose of albuterol may need to be adjusted based on the size of the dog. Following the
albuterol, use the nebulizer with 2–3 cc of sterile saline. Some pets have side effects from
albuterol although that is rare. Sometimes side effects are seen, such as nervousness, a
rapid heart rate or excessive panting, and they will disappear within an hour or so. If this
happens, report it to your veterinarian for a possible adjustment of dosage or change in
frequency of treatments.
If your veterinarian has not previously written a prescription for albuterol, for which there is
no veterinary version, here is an example of how to write it.
Albuterol 0.083% 2.5 cc vials × 25
sig: using a nebulizer, administer q8–24hr as directed
Albuterol comes in a box of 25 vials, each containing 2.5 cc.
1. Your veterinarian will prescribe the dose of albuterol for your pet.
2. Nebulize the computed dose of albuterol; if it is 1 cc or less, mix it with 1 cc of
saline solution.
3. Nebulize an additional 2–3 cc. of saline after the albuterol treatment is
completed.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Nebulizer Use for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5860662&ind=490&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Warning: Albuterol should not be administered to pets by people who have
heart or lung disorders. Ask your physician if it is safe for you to be exposed to
the albuterol mist given off during nebulization.
Saline decreases the thickness of mucus and helps moisturize the bronchioles, which
helps the pet cough up debris blocking the lungs. Saline solution can be obtained from
your veterinarian, or nebulizer saline can be obtained online.
Do not use saline solution intended for contact lenses.
Antibiotics such as gentocin or amikacin, which are intravenous antibiotics, can be mixed
with saline. These drugs can be hard on the kidneys, so ideally it is best to monitor kidney
function with blood and urine tests. These antibiotics are more kidney friendly when given
with a nebulizer than when given intravenously.
Preventing Aspiration Pneumonia
Nebulizer treatments with either saline and/or albuterol can help prevent recurrence of
aspiration pneumonia in pets with megaesophagus, pneumonia or bronchitis, and may be
helpful in managing laryngeal paralysis by helping to clear aspirated debris from the lungs.
Ask your veterinarian if your pet should have a preventive treatment daily, every other day
or twice weekly.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=5860662&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754289034
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:00 PM Nebulizer Use for Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=5860662&ind=490&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Profile view of the chest of an adolescent puppy who contracted pneumonia
shortly after shelter adoption. Air-filled healthy lung is mostly black with a
fine lacy overlay of lung tissue. The sections that appear whited out
represent pus and fluid secretion within the lung. Notice the dark "tree
branch" appearance over the white area of lung tissue. This is called an air
bronchogram and represents air inside an airway highlighted by the fluidfilled abnormal lung around it. Normally the branching of an airway is not
visible as it is adjacent to air-filled lung and blends in. Image courtesy
MarVistaVet
Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: February 07, 2024
Published: November 15, 2004
Most people have heard the term pneumonia and know it is a serious lung infection. In
fact, "pneumonia" is not a very specific term and essentially means inflammation of any
origin in the deep lung tissues, down where oxygen is normally absorbed and waste
gases are normally removed.
 Pneumonia has the potential to be life-threatening regardless of its cause, and there
can be many possible causes. Usually, there is an infectious disease at the root (virus,
bacteria, fungus, even a worm) but not necessarily. Pneumonia can be caused by inhaling
vomited or regurgitated food (aspiration pneumonia or pneumonitis), inhaling smoke or
chemicals, or it could be immune-mediated with no infection at all (eosinophilic infiltration).
Bronchitis is a separate condition from pneumonia and involves inflamed airways of the
lung rather than inflammation in the deep lung tissue itself, but pneumonia and bronchitis
commonly go together to create what is called bronchopneumonia.
Pneumonia is commonly
classified by its original cause:
Fungal pneumonia -
caused by a fungus,
typically Coccidioides
immitis, Cryptococcus
neoformans, or other
fungi.
Viral pneumonia -
usually the result of
canine distemper virus
infection, canine
influenza virus, or a
complicated feline
upper respiratory
infection.
Parasitic pneumonia -
directly from
lungworms or from
migration of other
worms through the
lung.
Bacterial pneumonia - often secondary to severe kennel cough, particularly in
young puppies that have been shipped long distances; aspiration as from
megaesophagus; or secondary to either cause.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952113&ind=491&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Aerial view or VD chest film showing the
collapsed/consolidated lung when this dog first started
treatment. Image courtesy of MarVistaVet
Allergic pneumonia - the result of extreme infiltration of the lung by
inflammatory cells in the absence of infection.
In most cases of pneumonia, there is a bacterial component. This means that no matter
what started the pneumonia, bacteria have joined in, adding their own pus, fever, and
potential for disaster; in most cases, managing the bacteria is vital. This article centers on
the management of bacterial component of pneumonia.
When to Suspect Pneumonia
The diagnosis of pneumonia hinges on the chest radiograph (x-ray) but knowing when to
take chest radiographs can be tricky. The veterinarian must put together findings from the
history, physical examination, and possibly response to initial therapies to decide if
radiographs should be checked.
Coughing puppies from the pet store or shelter may have a simple kennel
cough (minor bronchitis) but they are at a high risk for distemper infection.
Coughing dogs or cats with a fever, listlessness, or appetite loss should
definitely be radiographed for pneumonia; though many patients with
pneumonia will not have fevers and some will still be deceptively active.
Coughing dogs with a history of megaesophagus or with a history of symptoms
typical of megaesophagus should be radiographed for pneumonia.
Megaesophagus involves a floppy, dilated esophagus with a very high risk for
regurgitating and aspirating food.
Kittens with severe upper respiratory infections who do not respond to the usual
management should be radiographed for pneumonia.
Coughing is the hallmark symptom, though
certainly not all coughing pets or even most
of them have pneumonia, and many pets with
pneumonia - especially cats - hardly cough at
all. Bacterial pneumonia does not just
happen; it is virtually always caused by
something else, so some kind of diagnostics
will likely be needed to determine what led to
the bacterial pneumonia if it is not readily
apparent.
Treatment
The pneumonia patient may be in one of
three states:
Stable: in other words, eating well
and active despite a nasty cough
and/or abnormal chest radiographs.
These patients can often be treated
at home.
Unstable: poor appetite, inactive, in
need of hospitalization.
Critical: unable to get enough oxygen
into their systems. These patients

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952113&ind=491&objTypeID=1007 2/5
It has cleared substantially after a few days of treatment.
Image courtesy MarVistaVet
require oxygen therapy and
possibly 24-hour care.
The goal is to get the patient stable enough
for home treatment as several weeks are
needed to fully clear pneumonia. When the
patient is eating well, he may be
discharged with antibiotic pills, a regimen of
physical therapy, and a schedule for recheck radiographs (usually weekly).
The hospitalized patient has the
following needs:
Intravenous Fluid Therapy
Coughing may be annoying but it is
therapeutic and, when it comes to
pneumonia, we want to encourage it, not
suppress it. Coughing brings up the pus,
mucus, and inflammatory cell products that
make our patients sick. If the secretions of
the lung are allowed to dry up, the patient
will never be able to cough them up. For
this reason, IV fluids must be maintained to
keep our patient hydrated and keep the respiratory secretions wet.
Antibiotic Therapy
Antibiotics are given to kill the bacteria, but which antibiotics should be chosen? We need
something that will penetrate into the pus and mucus, which many antibiotics cannot do.
Often a four-quadrant approach is used that covers bacteria classified as Gram-negative
and Gram-positive as well as those classified as aerobic and anaerobic. This typically
involves two (or more) antibiotics used in combination to synergize one another and
covers almost every possible bacterial organism.
Alternatively, the lungs may be cultured through a procedure called a tracheal wash. This
process involves light sedation, which the patient must be stable enough to withstand.
Sample fluid from deep in the lung is retrieved for culture. A culture identifies the organism
and provides a list of antibiotics that can kill it. If possible, it is best to obtain a culture as a
surprising number of resistant bacteria are in the environment and we not only want to
confirm our antibiotic choice is appropriate but we do not want to needlessly develop
resistant bacteria. Culture can sometimes be falsely negative (especially if antibiotics have
already been started), or may only show common, non-pathological bacteria.
If the patient is sick enough for hospitalization, antibiotics are typically given as injections
so as to maximize absorption into the body.
Nebulization
Nebulization is similar to vaporization and involves equipment called a nebulizer. The
nebulizer creates a mist of fine fluid droplets that can be combined with antibiotics or
airway dilators. Unlike vaporized droplets, though, these droplets are small enough to
penetrate down into the lung. (Vaporizers make larger droplets, which mostly penetrate to
the sinuses only. They are used to moisten upper airway secretions while nebulizers
moisten lower airway secretions.) Nebulized saline or water may carry antibiotics with it,
providing an additional source of moisture and antibiotics for the sick lung thus deeply
treating the infection.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952113&ind=491&objTypeID=1007 3/5
This is a nebulizer. Many models are available
and they are even priced low enough for home
use.
Caption: A nebulizer is used to treat aspiration pneumonia. Photo
courtesy of Dr. Kathy Morris-Stilwell.
Physical Therapy
A technique called coupage helps mobilize
respiratory secretions, and your veterinarian can
demonstrate how to properly do this for your pet.
Coupage involves a person’s hand being cupped
and gently tapping repeatedly over different areas
of the patient’s chest wall quickly. It is important
not to pat too hard to avoid injuring your pet, and
best to use one hand with small breeds.
Watch a video demonstration of coupage.
Light exercise is also helpful in mobilizing the
respiratory secretions. The patient should not be
over-exerted as lung capacity is not normal but use
your judgment as to what level of exercise is
tolerated.
Oxygen Therapy
In most cases, oxygen therapy is
not necessary but when a
pneumonia patient simply cannot
move enough air, there is no
substitute for oxygen. Room air is
20% oxygen. An oxygen cage
typically is set to deliver 40%
oxygen, and oxygen-delivery hoods,
nasal oxygen, and high-flow oxygen
are also popular. Your veterinarian
will determine which method is best
for your pet. Pets who cannot
maintain oxygenation with these
methods sometimes need to be
mechanically ventilated with a
machine.
Home Care
Once a good appetite is evident, the patient may be discharged for home care. The
following tips are recommended as long as the patient is coughing:
Do not allow prolonged exposure to extreme cold or wet weather. Keep your
pet primarily indoors.
Consider using a vaporizer (or better yet, buy your own nebulizer, many models
are available and are even priced low enough for home use) for 10 to 15-minute
intervals a couple of times daily. If you do not have a vaporizer, leave the pet in
the bathroom with the shower on to create a misty vapor. If the bathroom does
not get sufficiently misty, a small pet can be confined to a carrier and the
vaporizer can be directed into this smaller space. As discussed, nebulization is
superior but vaporization is the next best thing.
Perform coupage at least four times daily and allow light exercise to promote
the cough.
Do not try to suppress the cough with over-the-counter cough suppressants.
We want the infected material in the chest to be coughed up.
Use the antibiotics as directed. Advice regarding antibiotic regimens has
recently changed, so a short or long course may be prescribed based on your
pet's needs and the cause of pneumonia.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952113&ind=491&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Fungal infectious may require several weeks of antifungal medications, as well
as other medications to control inflammation.
Water intake is vital in treating pneumonia at home - encourage your pet to take
in as much water as they can, and discuss methods of increasing water intake
(such as adding broth or water to food) with your veterinarian.
Know when you should return for re-check radiographs.
Pneumonia is a serious infection and several weeks are needed to clear it. Prognosis
ultimately depends on what the underlying cause was but the good news is that most
patients are not sick enough to require oxygen therapy and the majority of these ultimately
recover with proper treatment.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952113&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754289057
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumonia Management in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952113&ind=491&objTypeID=1007 5/5

This position was the only one in
which Kodee was comfortable
prior to surgery. Photo by Linda
Pace.
Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: March 03, 2020
Published: March 12, 2007
Pneumothorax is a collection of air or gas in the space
surrounding the lungs. The extra air doesn’t allow the lungs
to inflate normally, so dogs and cats with pneumothorax can
have difficulty breathing (dyspnea), an increased respiratory
rate, exercise intolerance, chest pain, cyanosis, collapsed
lungs, etc. If only a tiny bit of air gets inside the chest cavity,
it can be resorbed and the pet can heal without medical help.
But if there is a lot of air in the chest cavity, it must be
removed medically. If severe cases are left untreated, the
pneumothorax can be fatal.
Pneumothorax may result from chest trauma, excessive
pressure on the lungs, or underlying lung disease (asthma,
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, etc.). In some cases,
the cause is never discovered.
Types of Pneumothorax
The three forms of pneumothorax are:
1. A hole in the chest wall that allows air inside the
open chest cavity
2. The chest wall doesn’t have a hole, but there’s one
in the lungs, bronchi, trachea, or esophagus
3. A rip in the pleura (the membrane in the lungs) that acts like a one-way valve
(lets air in, but doesn’t let it exit).
Specifically, the types can be categorized as follows:
Closed pneumothorax: air is leaking from a hole in a lung cyst, bronchus,
trachea, esophagus, or lung tissue into the chest cavity.
Open pneumothorax: air is entering the chest cavity via an open wound in the
chest wall. Causes include animal bites, gunshot wounds, puncture wounds,
and automobile accidents.
Iatrogenic pneumothorax: air entered the chest cavity during lung surgery or
procedures.
Spontaneous pneumothorax: (no known cause for the air in the chest cavity).
Tension pneumothorax: air entered the chest cavity from the bronchus, but
cannot leave the same way, thus causing progressive collapse of the lung

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952615&ind=492&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Surgeons removed one and a half lung
lobes from Kodee, who recuperated
wonderfully. Photo by Jack Pace.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic tests include patient history, physical exam
(respiratory distress, coughing, difficulty breathing,
traumatic wounds, etc.), chest imaging (radiography, CT,
ultrasonography, MRI), and removing air from the chest
cavity using a syringe (thoracentesis).
Treatment
Treatment depends upon the type of pneumothorax and
how bad it is. Minor cases may resolve with 1 to 2 weeks
of cage rest. Severe cases are a real emergency, and
your veterinarian will probably give oxygen immediately;
dogs and cats are placed in an oxygen cage. Your
veterinarian may need to put in a chest tube to remove
the extra air from the chest. Surgery may be needed to close up large holes in the chest,
to fix injuries, or to remove damaged lung lobes (lobectomy). Unlike people, who have
five lung lobes, dogs and cats have seven lobes.
Prognosis
The prognosis depends on how severe the case is and how early treatment was given.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952615&pid=19239
27ef86e3-c699-4248-b5e5-a85490d82fdc.1754289079
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pneumothorax in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952615&ind=492&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Normal anatomy of a dog's heart. Illustration by Tamara Rees of VIN.
Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 29, 2023
Published: July 15, 2008
Pulmonic stenosis, affectionately known as PS, is the third most common congenital heart
disease in dogs. It can be accompanied by additional heart defects to create a
constellation of disaster or it can be mild enough to be no more than a surprising
incidental finding. Occasionally cats are affected as well.
Pulmonic stenosis refers to a constriction of the pulmonic heart valve through which blood
must pass on its way from the heart to the lung.
In order to
understand
what pulmonic
stenosis is, it
is necessary to
understand
some normal
heart anatomy.
The heart sits
more or less
centrally in the
chest and is
divided into a
left side, which
receives
oxygen-rich
blood from the
lung and
pumps it to the
rest of the
body, and a
right side,
which receives
“used” blood from the body and pumps it to the lung to pick up fresh oxygen. Because the
left side of the heart must supply blood to the whole body, its muscle is especially thick
and strong, while the right side, which only pumps to one nearby area (the lungs) tends to
be thinner.
When the ventricles pump, the blood from the left shoots through a valve called the aortic
valve, and the blood from the right side shoots through the pulmonic valve (also called the
pulmonary valve). These valves snap sharply closed after the pumping is done. The area
where the blood exits the right ventricle is called the right ventricular outflow tract and
consists of the exit area of the ventricle, the pulmonic valve, and the main pulmonary
artery.
Pulmonic Stenosis

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952783&ind=493&objTypeID=1007 1/5
In pulmonic stenosis, the right ventricular outflow tract is narrowed either at the valve, just
before it, or just after it. The most common form of pulmonic stenosis involves a deformed
pulmonary valve in which the valve leaflets are too thick, the opening is too narrow, or the
valve cusps are fused. The heart must pump extra hard to get the blood through this
unusually narrow, stiff little valve. The right side of the heart eventually becomes thick from
all this extra work and a post-stenotic dilation (a large bulging area on the far side of the
narrowed valve) results from the high-pressure squirt the heart must generate to get blood
through the stenosis. As the heart muscle builds up to become strong enough to pump
through the stenosis, electrical conduction through the changed muscle tissue may not be
normal. The rhythm of the heart’s filling and pumping cycle can be disturbed as the
muscle becomes abnormal.
Predisposed breeds for this condition include Labrador retrievers, terrier breeds, miniature
schnauzers, Samoyeds, English bulldogs, boxers, chow chows, beagles, cocker spaniels,
basset hounds, and mastiffs.
What Does this all Mean for your Pet?
A mild pulmonic stenosis is of little concern and usually does not affect life
expectancy. Luckily, most cases are mild and do not require treatment; fairly severe
disease is needed for clinical signs to appear.
Approximately 35% of dogs with severe pulmonic stenosis will show some or all of the
following signs:
Tiring easily
Fainting spells (from the abnormal electrical heart rhythm)
Fluid accumulation in the belly
Blue-tinge to the gums, especially with exertion
In one study, 30% of dogs with severe disease experienced sudden death.
How is a Diagnosis Made?
The turbulent blood flow resulting from the heart attempting to pump blood through the
narrow pulmonic valve generates a sound called a murmur. (A murmur is not specific for
pulmonic stenosis; anytime there is turbulent blood flow, it may be audible as a murmur.) If
the electrical conduction of the heart is affected, the rhythm will sound irregular as well.
A murmur and abnormal rhythm picked up during a puppy's initial examination is the
classic time to find the disease, but it may not become evident until later when signs of
heart failure are seen. Possibly, the disease might not be detected until there are more
obvious signs of heart failure present, such as fluid in the belly.
Once physical findings suggest heart disease, radiographs and, ideally, an
echocardiogram follow.
After the diagnosis of pulmonic stenosis is made, the next most important issue is to
grade its severity. This is done with a type of ultrasound called continuous wave Doppler
echocardiography. A pressure gradient across the pulmonic valve can be measured in
units called millimeters of mercury (mm of Hg.) A pressure gradient of less than 40 mm of
Hg generally requires no treatment at all. A gradient greater than 80 mm of Hg has a
significant risk of sudden death, and therapy should be pursued (generally balloon
valvuloplasty). The benefits of valvuloplasty in dogs with gradients between 40 and 80 are
not as predictable. The diagnosis is clinched with the echocardiogram, where ultrasound
is used to measure the diameter and thickness of the heart’s chambers. It is then easy to
see the thick right ventricle and actually measure its thickness. If there is tricuspid valve
disease and backward flow of blood, this can also be seen in a real-time image. A patent
foramen ovale, if there is one, can also be seen (see below).
Treatment: Balloon Valvuloplasty

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952783&ind=493&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Chest radiograph of a puppy with pulmonic stenosis. Post
stenotic dilation is conspicuous. (Photo by marvistavet.com)
Clearly, if the obstruction at the
pulmonic valve could be relieved, much
of the problem would be solved. Severe
pulmonic stenosis cases can be treated
by doing just that. A balloon is inserted
into the pulmonic valve where it is
inflated, breaking down the obstruction.
The size of the balloon catheter is
determined by echocardiography as
described above. Dogs that have
pressure gradients of greater than 80
mm Hg across the pulmonic valve
should have this procedure regardless
of whether or not they are showing
clinical signs. Some experts feel 60 mm
Hg is a high enough gradient to warrant
valvuloplasty. Dogs with concurrent
tricuspid valve dysplasia benefit from
this procedure regardless of their
pressure gradient.
Performing this procedure reduces the risk of sudden death by 53% and improves quality
of life as well. Certain types of valve deformity are not amenable to this treatment and
dogs with the type of pulmonic stenosis that has a coronary artery wrapped around the
pulmonary artery (the R2A anomaly - see below) are similarly not amenable to this
treatment. For these dogs, unfortunately, there is no treatment that can be recommended.
Balloon valvuloplasty will tear the abnormal coronary artery and alternative therapy has
not been successfully developed. For these dogs, the prognosis is better without
attempted therapy.
What are Possible Valvulplasty Complications/What is Suicide Right Ventricle?
If the right ventricle and its outflow tract become too thickened, a pressure gradient
problem can persist after the stenosis is relieved by valvuloplasty. Suicide right ventricle is
a phenomenon that occurs in a severely stenosed valve immediately after pressure is
relieved by valvuloplasty. The heart muscle has grown so stiff after pumping against the
stenosis valve that a new obstruction occurs. Medication and fluid therapy can help
prevent this complication of valvuloplasty. Other complications of valvuloplasty include
heart arrhythmias, rupture of the valve, or even puncture of the heart itself. Valvuloplasty
is an advanced procedure and must be respected as such. Fortunately, serious
complications are rare but it is important to be informed of potential problems, and most
patients are released to go home the day of their procedure. Pressure gradients continue
to drop for several months after the procedure and medication is generally needed
throughout this time. It takes a good three to six months before the success of the
valvuloplasty can be judged.
Treatment: Surgery
Dogs for whom the stenosis is just before the valve rather than at the valve itself may
benefit from surgery. Several techniques can be used to widen the pulmonary valve or to
bypass it. These procedures require an experienced surgeon and bear significant risk.
The balloon valvuloplasty is the preferred treatment for cases where treatment is
recommended and where balloon valvuloplasty is applicable.
Treatment: Medication
Unfortunately, medication is not very helpful for pulmonic stenosis except to manage any
right-sided heart failure. In some cases, medications called beta blockers can be used in
an attempt to relax the muscles of the heart and dilate the stenosis. This will not relieve

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952783&ind=493&objTypeID=1007 3/5
the constriction but could ease it.
Pulmonic stenosis is a condition that not all veterinarians are comfortable treating.
Discuss with your veterinarian whether referral to a veterinary cardiologist would be best
for you and your pet.
Possible Complicating Concurrent Anatomical Problems
Concurrent Coronary Artery Constriction
Boxers and bulldogs have a type of pulmonic stenosis where a coronary artery actually
wraps around the pulmonary artery exiting the heart, thus constricting it. This is called the
R2A anomaly. This anomaly is of clinical importance because the coronary artery can tear
if balloon valvuloplasty (see above) is attempted as a treatment.
Concurrent Tricuspid Insufficiency
Another form of pulmonic stenosis that is especially harmful involves an accompanying
tricuspid valve dysplasia. The tricuspid valve is the three-leafed valve that separates the
right atrium (blood-accepting chamber) from the right ventricle (the pumping chamber).
Normally this valve is closed when the ventricle pumps, ensuring that all its blood pumps
forward. If this valve is leaky then some of the blood, perhaps even most of it, pumps
backward. If the pulmonic valve is extra tight, as in pulmonic stenosis, and the tricuspid
valve is extra loose, as in tricuspid dysplasia, it is easy to see that the right ventricle must
become extra strong (thick) to pump enough blood through the tight pulmonic valve, and
extra large (wide) to accommodate enough blood to send an adequate amount forward,
considering that most will go backward. Right heart failure is not far behind as the right
side of the heart simply cannot keep up with such a double whammy of circumstances.
Concurrent Patent Foramen Ovale
Another congenital problem that can complicate pulmonic stenosis is called a patent
foramen ovale. Before birth, one's oxygen comes from the mom's bloodstream (obviously,
there is no breathing of air going on in the womb). The unborn heart is developing a right
side (pump to the lung to pick up oxygen) and a left side (send the oxygen to the rest of
the body) but during the actual development, the right and left blood mix together as there
is no need for separation.
The foramen ovale is a hole in the septum of the developing heart allowing for right and
left blood to mix together. Shortly after birth, when the lungs formally come into play, the
foramen ovale closes up and the right and left sides of the heart are completely
separated.
If the patient has pulmonic stenosis, the pressures in the right side of the heart are so high
that blood is pushed from the right atrium into the left atrium with every beat of the heart,
thus preventing the closure of the foramen. This allows unoxygenated blood to mix into
the circuit reserved for oxygenated blood. If enough oxygen-poor blood is allowed into this
circuit, the patient’s tissues may not receive enough oxygen, but generally, this is merely a
mild phenomenon noticed on the echocardiogram.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952783&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754289105
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952783&ind=493&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:01 PM Pulmonic Stenosis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952783&ind=493&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Resource Guarding in Dogs
Published: October 04, 2021
Samantha Zurlinden
What is resource guarding and why does it occur?
Resource guarding is a relatively common behavior problem in dogs. It is defined as a dog
using avoidance, threatening, or aggressive behaviors to retain control of food or other items
in front of a person or other animal.
Sometimes, the signs of resource guarding are subtle. In these cases, your dog may show
avoidance behavior or mild signs of aggression and anxiety such as stiff or crouched body
posture, pinned back ears, lip licking, and physically blocking access to the resource. The
aggression may escalate to more severe and overt signs of aggression such as growling,
snapping, or biting. Food and food-related items are the most common resources that are
guarded by dogs. However, any resource that is valuable to the dog may be guarded. This
includes but is not limited to toys, beds, furniture, bones, resting areas, and even certain
people. Resource guarding may have a genetic component and occurs in males or females
of any breed. This issue can develop at any age. Resource guarding may be an issue that
appears and progresses over time, or it may begin suddenly after a change in environment
or routine.
Resource guarding does not have anything to do with dominance. It is a common
misconception that dogs show aggression or develop behavior problems because they do
not understand their “place in the pack.” This misconception is problematic because it often
leads to training using force and punishment to show the dog who is “top dog.” However,
dominance in this sense has been scientifically debunked. Using force and punishment in a
situation like resource guarding often makes the behavior problem worse and can cause your
animal to fear you and damage your relationship. To successfully manage resource guarding,
we must change the underlying motivation and emotion behind the behavior (anxiety, fear,
frustration). Studies have shown that reward-based methods are more effective and humane
when managing behavior problems such as resource guarding.
To a degree, resource guarding can be considered a normal canine behavior since obtaining
resources is necessary for survival. However, just because it can be considered normal does
not make it desirable, safe, or acceptable in a household. Unfortunately, over time, dogs may
learn that their aggressive responses are effective at protecting their resources, so the
behavior will persist or even worsen. Additionally, if a dog’s mild signs of aggression are
ignored or punished, this can cause their behaviors to escalate to more severe forms of
aggression. For example, a dog may initially show mild signs such as freezing or hunching
over their resource with a stiff body posture. If this behavior is punished or ignored the dog
will likely realize subtle signs are not effective. In this situation, dogs are likely to escalate to
more overt forms of aggression, such as growling, snapping, or biting. Then it becomes more
challenging to manage and treat the issue.
How can my veterinarian help with Resource Guarding?

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=10751715&ind=494&objTypeID=10 1/4
Your veterinarian may be able to help you with this problem themselves, or they may refer
you to a veterinary behaviorist. If you are experiencing this problem with your pet, it is
important that you discuss it with your veterinarian.
Resource guarding may be caused by an underlying medical issue, especially if the behavior
starts suddenly in an adult dog. Your veterinarian will complete a thorough physical exam
and may request further testing based on their findings to determine if there is a medical
issue. Sometimes medications can be helpful in the treatment of resource guarding
especially if anxiety is a cause for the behavior.
Photo courtesy of CattleDog Publishing
Treatment and Management: What to do:
Safety is the utmost priority. You may need to use tools such as baby gates,
crates, or exercise pens to separate the dog from people or other pets when the
object is nearby.
Separate pets from each other when resources are nearby.
Attempt to avoid clutter in your home so that it is possible to have more
control over things. You do not necessarily want to restrict access to the
resources or take them away completely, but you do want to control the
situation so your dog can get to their resources in a way that is safe for
everyone.
Identify all situations and resources that are guarded. Recording in a diary or on a
calendar may be useful. You may want to record information such as:
When/how often resource guarding is occurring
Who is the dog guarding the resource from?
What resources is the dog guarding?
What behaviors are you seeing from your dog during the incident?
Learn to understand and respect what your dog is telling you. Learn to recognize
dog body language and understand how it can escalate from more mild, subtle
signs of aggression (such as lip licking, stiff body posture, ears pinned back) to

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=10751715&ind=494&objTypeID=10 2/4
the overt signs of aggression (growling, snapping, biting). If we respect dogs’ body
language when they show mild signs of anxiety and aggression, we can likely
avoid the behavior becoming more severe.
Make sure your dog gets enough exercise and play every day.
Behavior Modification
All household members must follow the same guidelines to manage this
behavior. It must be a collaborative effort.
Here are some examples of behavioral modification techniques that may be
used.
“Drop it”- Teach your dog to drop the item of value in exchange for a
higher-value item or treat.
Relaxation exercises- this is especially helpful if resting places or
certain people are guarded by the dog. With relaxation training, you can
teach your dog to relax other places than the valued resting spot or
away from the person that they guard. This can also include teaching a
“place” behavior such as to a mat or dog bed.
Basket muzzle training - training your dog to be comfortable wearing a
basket muzzle can be a useful tool to restrict access to certain
resources for some situations.
Be realistic about what you can expect from your dog and what you can
handle in your specific situation.
In rare and severe cases of resource guarding and aggression, euthanasia
may be considered a humane option for both the dog’s welfare and human
safety.
Treatment and Management: What NOT to do:
Do not use force or punishment to attempt to correct this behavior.
Do not attempt to remove the resource of value from your dog as this could lead
to injury.
Your dog’s resource guarding behavior may never diminish completely resulting in
long-term management To reduce the behavior.
Prevention and Avoidance
Expose puppies to a wide range of toys and encourage them to share by calmly
exchanging toys during play.

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=10751715&ind=494&objTypeID=10 3/4
Train verbal cues such as “Drop it”, “Trade”, and “Leave it” using positive
reinforcement training before resource guarding develops.
Provide your dog with a safe, comfortable space such as a crate or exercise pen
that is only for your dog. It is important to not play with your dog’s food or put your
hand in the bowl while eating. It is always important to add something like a
special treat when humans are in close proximity to the bowl.
The treatment of resource guarding needs to be highly individualized for each dog and
household. These dogs often need a combination of behavioral modification, training, and
environmental and management changes.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=10751715&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754289128
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Resource Guarding in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=10751715&ind=494&objTypeID=10 4/4

Reverse Sneezing in Dogs
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: January 30, 2024
Published: June 26, 2006
What is Reverse Sneezing?
Reverse sneezing is a disconcerting event in which a dog makes unpleasant respiratory
sounds that sound like it is dying -- or will die in the next few minutes. This is called
reverse sneezing because it sounds a bit like a dog inhaling sneezes. The sound the dog
makes can be scary, and reverse sneezing sounds similar to the honking noise made by a
dog with a collapsing trachea. However, the good news is that reverse sneezing is a far
simpler condition that usually does not need any treatment.
Because it can be difficult for an owner to recognize a reverse sneezing episode when it
first happens, it is a good idea to check with the veterinarian to determine if it's reverse
sneezing or something more serious.
Click on the image to view a video of a dog with a reverse sneeze:
Video courtesy of Geri A. Carlson, DVM
Causes of Reverse Sneezing
The most common cause of reverse sneezing is an irritation of the soft palate and throat
that results in a spasm. During the spasm, the dog’s neck will extend and the chest will
expand as the dog tries harder to inhale. The problem is that the trachea has narrowed,
and it’s hard to get the normal amount of air into the lungs.

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Reverse Sneezing in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952493&ind=495&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Anything that irritates the throat can cause this spasm and subsequent sneeze. Causes
include excitement, eating or drinking, exercise intolerance, pulling on a leash, collar/tags
pressing on and irritating the throat, mites, pollen, foreign bodies caught in the throat,
perfumes, viruses, household chemicals, allergies, and post-nasal drip.
If an irritant in the house is the cause, taking the dog outside can help simply because the
dog will no longer be inhaling the irritant. Brachycephalic dogs (those with flat faces, such
as Pugs and Boxers) with elongated soft palates occasionally suck the elongated palate
into the throat while inhaling, causing reverse sneezing. Small dogs are particularly prone
to it, possibly because they have smaller throats.
Monitoring and Treatment
Reverse sneezing itself rarely requires treatment. If the sneezing stops, the spasm is over.
Some veterinarians may recommend massaging the dog’s throat to stop the spasm; some
may suggest covering the nostrils for a few seconds to make the dog swallow, which clears
out whatever the irritation is and stops the sneezing.
Treatment of the underlying cause, if known, is useful. If mites are in the laryngeal area,
your veterinarian may use drugs such as ivermectin to get rid of the mites. If allergies are
the root of the problem, your veterinarian may prescribe antihistamines. If reverse sneezing
becomes a chronic problem rather than an occasional occurrence, your veterinarian may
need to look up the nasal passages (rhinoscopy), and may even need to take a biopsy to
determine the cause of the problem. Sometimes, however, no cause can be identified.
Some dogs have these episodes their entire lives; some dogs develop the condition only
as they age. In most dogs, however, the spasm is a temporary problem that goes away on
its own, leaving the dog with no after-effects.
Cats are less likely to reverse sneeze than dogs are. However, owners should always
have the veterinarian examine the cat in case it's feline asthma and not a reverse sneeze.
Feline asthma requires more treatment than reverse sneezing does.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952493&pid=19239
aab78427-fd12-4cd1-892a-fc465e2c2716.1754289155
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:02 PM Reverse Sneezing in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4952493&ind=495&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Graphic courtesy of MarVistaVet
Graphic courtesy of MarVistaVet
Inhalation Radiograph of Collapsing
Trachea
Tracheal Collapse in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: April 30, 2024
Published: September 01, 2003
What is the Trachea Anyway?
Trachea is the scientific name for the
windpipe, the tube that connects the nose,
mouth, and throat to the lungs. The trachea
is meant to be a fairly rigid tube. It consists
of muscle connecting a group of cartilage
rings. The rings are actually not complete
circles; they form a C with the open end of
the C facing towards the animal's back. The
muscle covering the open end of the C is
called the tracheal membrane or sometimes
the trachealis muscle.
When the diaphragm (the flat muscle
separating the abdomen from the chest cavity) flattens and the intercostal muscles (the
muscles between the ribs) move, air is sucked into the lung. When the muscles move in
the opposite direction, air is pushed out of the lung.
The trachea serves as a pipeline bringing air in and out of the chest. The trachea spans
the length of the throat and extends into the chest cavity so that we can look at the
trachea as having an intrathoracic portion (inside the chest) and an extrathoracic portion
(outside the chest).
Why Would a Trachea Collapse?
Tracheas collapse because the cartilage
rings weaken, which is where the term
tracheomalacia comes into play.
Tracheomalacia is the condition where
the cartilage becomes spongy and soft.
Cartilage in this condition cannot hold its
rigid C-shaped supportive structure.
When the C-shape loses its curvature,
the tracheal membrane across the
top stretches out and loosens,
becoming floppy. Instead of being a tight
muscle canopy, the now flimsy membrane
moves as air passes through the trachea.
When air rushes into the chest, the
membrane of the intrathoracic trachea
balloons outward, and when air rushes
out the membrane of the intrathoracic
trachea droops down into the C cartilage

8/4/25, 12:03 PM Tracheal Collapse in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951968&ind=496&objTypeID=1007 1/5
The trachea is outlined by the yellow flashing line
and looks relatively normal on inhalation.
Radiograph by MarVistaVet
Exhalation Radiograph of Collapsing
Trachea
The trachea collapse is much more pronounced.
Radiograph by MarVistaVet
Radiograph of Collapsing Trachea
One Year Later
Tracheal collapse has progressed from moderate
to severe. Radiograph by MarVistaVet
and causes an occlusion. The tickling
sensation of the membrane touching the
tracheal lining generates coughing, and if
the obstruction interrupts breathing the
patient may become distressed. If the
collapse is in the extrathoracic (also
called the cervical) trachea, the opposite
occurs: the collapse occurs during
inhalation and the ballooning during
exhalation. In the unluckiest of patients,
the tracheomalacia includes not only the
trachea but down the bronchi (larger lung
airways) as well. These patients have the
worst prognosis and the worst coughing.
Panting or rapid breathing for any reason
makes the collapse and anxiety worse,
which unfortunately tends to generate
more rapid breathing and a vicious cycle
of distress.
Making things worse still is the
inflammation generated in the trachea.
The collapse creates increased secretion
and inflammation, thus promoting yet
more coughing, which creates yet more
inflammation. The enzymes involved in
inflammation further soften the tracheal
cartilage, making the collapse worse.
Ultimately, the tissue of the trachea
changes and loses its normal
characteristics and the condition gets
worse and worse.
The trachea may be collapsed along its
entire length, only in the intrathoracic
section, or only in the extrathoracic
section. Most commonly the collapse is at
its worst right where the trachea enters
the chest.
What Animals are Affected?
The victim is almost always a toy breed
dog, with poodles, Yorkshire terriers, and Pomeranians most commonly affected. The
disease usually becomes problematic in middle age but can occur at any age. The
cartilage defect that leads to the flattened C rings seems to be hereditary.
Many dogs with collapsed tracheas do not show symptoms, however, until a second
problem complicates matters. Factors that bring out symptoms might include:
Obesity
Anesthesia involving the placement of an endotracheal tube
Development of kennel cough or other respiratory infection
Increased respiratory irritants in the air (cigarette smoke, dust, etc.)
Heart enlargement (the heart can get so big that it presses on the trachea)

8/4/25, 12:03 PM Tracheal Collapse in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951968&ind=496&objTypeID=1007 2/5
If a secondary factor such as one of those listed above should occur and make a
previously incidental collapsed trachea problematic, oftentimes removal of the secondary
factor (weight loss program, getting an air filter, etc.) may clear up the symptoms of the
collapsed trachea.
Treatment
The following steps are often helpful in long-term management of the tracheal collapse
patient:
If any of the above-listed secondary problems are of concern, they must be
addressed. This may mean that the owner gives up cigarettes or that the dog
goes on a formal weight loss program or other treatment to resolve the
exacerbating problem.
Dogs with collapsed tracheas become unable to efficiently clear infectious
organisms from their lower respiratory tracts. Antibiotics may be needed
periodically to clear up infection.
Cough suppressants such as hydrocodone may be handy.
Corticosteroids such as prednisone and related hormones cut secretion of
mucus effectively but are best used on a short-term basis only due to sideeffects potential. Long-term use may promote infection and weaken cartilage
further. Inhalers for dogs, similar to what asthmatic humans use, may help
deliver corticosteroids while minimizing side effects.
Airway dilators such as theophylline or terbutaline are controversial as they
may dilate lower airways but not the actual trachea. By dilating lower airways,
however, the pressure in the chest during inhalation is not as great and the
trachea may not collapse as greatly.
Stanozolol, an anabolic steroid, has been shown to improve the symptoms of
collapsing trachea in many patients. In one study, over 50% of the dogs tested
completely stopped coughing and another 30% showed improvement in their
condition. The problem is that this medication is no longer marketed in the U.S.
and is only available through compounding pharmacies. It has become difficult
to obtain.
In a recent retrospective study of 100 dogs with collapsing trachea, 71 percent responded
to medication and management of secondary factors (obesity, irritants in the air, etc.), 7%
had disease so severe that they died within one month of diagnosis, 6 percent had severe
additional disease problems, and the other 16 percent were felt to be candidates for
surgical treatment.
Emergency
The patient's distress can reach a level so severe that the normally pink mucous
membranes become bluish, and collapse can result. When this occurs, tranquilization is
helpful to relieve the anxiety that perpetuates the heavy breathing and coughing. Oxygen
therapy and cough suppressants also help. If the patient reaches the point where distress
seems extreme or if collapse results, treat this as an emergency and rush the pet to
emergency veterinary care.
Surgery?

8/4/25, 12:03 PM Tracheal Collapse in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951968&ind=496&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Tracheal Stent
Photo courtesy MarVistaVet.
If medical management does not produce satisfactory results, surgery may be beneficial.
There are two procedures currently in use: placing steel tracheal rings to shore up the
weakened cartilage and placing a cylindrical mesh prosthesis referred to as a tracheal
stent. Either one might be used though in recent years there has been a trend toward the
mesh stent and away from the ring prostheses. Both procedures have the potential for
complications, and while improvement can be expected, patients will still require oral
medications for coughing at least some of the time.
Ring Prosthesis
In this procedure a rigid prosthesis is placed and bonded around the trachea, effectively
creating a non-collapsible tube. This procedure is largely effective as long as the
collapsed portion is external to the chest. Should the intrathoracic trachea be involved, the
surgery becomes far less successful. The ring prosthesis technique is reported to yield
improvement in 75-85% of patients receiving it, but Buback's 1996 study also showed a
5% mortality rate and 10% of patients requiring a permanent tracheostomy (a surgically
created hole in the trachea for breathing) within 24 hours of surgery. Furthermore, 11%
developed laryngeal paralysis as a result of the surgery and another 9% required a
permanent tracheostomy later on. In that study, only 11% of patients had intrathoracic
collapse so complications were by no means limited to those. Median survival was 25
months in that study.
Mesh Stent
The tracheal stent is a self-expanding, cylindrical stainless steel prosthesis. A study
reporting the results of 24 dogs receiving this prosthesis was published in January 2004.
Of these dogs, 96% showed improvement after surgery. Two dogs died within the first
week due to stent placement complications. One dog experienced some bleeding. After
the immediate post-surgical period, 30% were reported to be completely free of
symptoms, 61% showed marked improvement, and 4% continued to have symptoms.
Since this study, hundreds if not thousands of canine patients have received tracheal
stents and improvement has been seen in 75-90% of patients. Complications generally
stem from problems positioning the stent or with proliferative inflammatory tissues that can
grow around the stent, causing further airway narrowing.
Surgical solutions for tracheal collapse are
not for mild cases; they are for cases that
cannot be adequately controlled by
medication, weight loss, and other nonsurgical means. If you are interested in
pursuing a surgical solution, speak to your
veterinarian about what is involved for your
particular pet.
Surgery for a tracheal collapse may be a
procedure that your veterinarian is not
comfortable performing. Discuss with your veterinarian whether a referral to a specialist
may be in your pet's best interest.
Is Liver Disease Associated?
In the July/August 2006 issue of the Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine, a group of
researchers led by Natali B. Bauer pursued the common finding of enlarged liver in dogs
with tracheal collapse. Her group looked at 26 dogs with tracheal collapse and compared
liver function test results to 42 dogs without tracheal collapse. Ninety-two percent (92
percent) of dogs with tracheal collapse were found to have abnormal results. Dogs that
received stent placement to assist their breathing showed improvement in these tests. It
was concluded that oxygen deprivation from the collapse had resulted in significant liver

8/4/25, 12:03 PM Tracheal Collapse in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951968&ind=496&objTypeID=1007 4/5
disease in many tracheal collapse patients. It was further recommended that tracheal
collapse patients have liver function tests periodically performed as liver supportive
medications may be helpful.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951968&pid=19239
27ef86e3-c699-4248-b5e5-a85490d82fdc.1754289199
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:03 PM Tracheal Collapse in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=4951968&ind=496&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Using Dogs to Sniff Out Respiratory Disease in Calves
Bob Judd, DVM, DABVP (Equine Medicine), DABVP (Canine and Feline Practice)
Published: April 25, 2023
Bovine respiratory disease is the leading cause of death in calves, and Texas A&M
University is researching how dogs can be used to sniff out which calves are infected.
Dogs have been trained to sniff out human diseases, and Dr. Courtney Daigle, DVM,
Assistant Professor, West Texas A&M University, is working with respiratory specialist Dr.
John Richeson, B.S., M.S., Ph.D., Assistant Professor of Animal Science, and dog training
expert Dr. Nathan Hall at Texas Tech University, to see if dogs can be trained to do the
same with cattle.
The first study looked at the equipment and training needed. The second study used cattle
from the Texas AgriLife Research Center and guard dogs from the prison system in
Huntsville, TX.
Dr. Daigle says this technology could change how antimicrobial treatment is applied in
commercial beef production. Currently, cattle health is evaluated at the group level, and if
thought necessary, the entire group is treated with antibiotics. By using trained dogs to
find individual animals that are infected, fewer antibiotics would be needed.
A well-trained dog and handler near the cattle chute could allow the producer to target
only infected animals with antibiotics, significantly reducing the amount of antibiotics and
saving the producer money.
In the pilot study, two dogs were trained in a series of stages over seven months to be
able to know the difference between nasal swabs collected upon arrival at the feedlot from
cattle that developed a respiratory infection within 20 days and cattle that did not develop
a respiratory infection in the next three months.
The first study did not show a positive response, and it was concluded that bovine
respiratory disease may be more difficult to diagnose than other diseases. The second
study, now underway, will decide if the dogs can tell sick cattle from healthy cattle.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11484785&pid=19239
e2c23a5c-f275-4b52-a32b-0683faea20db.1754289272
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 12:04 PM Using Dogs to Sniff Out Respiratory Disease in Calves - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=11484785&ind=497&objTypeID=1007 1/2

8/4/25, 12:04 PM Using Dogs to Sniff Out Respiratory Disease in Calves - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254102&id=11484785&ind=497&objTypeID=1007 2/2



