This endoscopic photograph of calcium oxalate bladder
stones are in a dog. Bladder stones can be detected during
periods of urinary discomfort or they might be discovered
incidentally as a surprise. If allowed to remain in the
bladder, they can lead to on-going infection, urinary
obstruction or continuing discomfort so they must be
addressed. Preventive measures must be taken to avoid
the formation of new stones. Photo by Dr. Craig Stanton.
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 01, 2022
Published: January 01, 2001
There are many types of bladder stones, and each tends to form in a specific breed or
species under specific conditions. 
Oxalate Bladder Stones in Dogs
73% of calcium oxalate patients are male.
Breeds at especially high risk include miniature schnauzers, Lhasa Apsos,
Yorkshire terriers, miniature poodles, Shih Tzus, and Bichon Frises.
Most cases occur in dogs between ages 5 and 12 years of age.
How Are Stone Types Determined?
Although a urinalysis can provide a clue,
the only way to know for sure that a dog’s
bladder stone is an oxalate is to retrieve a
stone and have a laboratory analyze it. If
the stones are very small, flushing the
urinary bladder and expressing it (known
as voiding urohydropropulsion) may not
only produce a stone sample for testing but
remove all the stones and alleviate the
current signs. When stones are too large to
fit out the urethra, they can be removed to
resolve signs and obtain sample stones by
surgical removal from the bladder (the
traditional method), retrieving them by
sending a cystoscope up the urethra, or by
using laparoscopy (percutaneous
cystolithotomy – PCCL) to send a
cystoscope through a small incision into
the abdomen and then into the bladder and
using a grabbing device in the cystoscope
channel to retrieve them. Calcium oxalate
stones cannot be made to dissolve over time by changing to a special diet (as can be
done with struvite or uric acid bladder stones).
Why Would My Dog Form Calcium Oxalate Stones?
It shouldn't be too surprising that there is a strong hereditary component to forming
oxalate bladder stones; this is also true in humans. There is a substance (called
nephrocalcin) in urine that naturally inhibits the formation of calcium oxalate stones.
This substance can be defective in both humans and dogs who form calcium oxalate
bladder stones. This has been demonstrated in Miniature Schnauzers. Other breeds, such
as English Bulldogs and related breeds have Hereditary Calcium Oxalate Urolithiasis Type

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 1/6
1, which is noteworthy for earlier age at the initial development of stones. There is also a
Type 2 disorder from a different mutation. There are other potential genetic causes as
well.
There is a bacteria that exists as part of the normal flora of the GI tract that metabolizes
oxalate. Antimicrobial use may eliminate this good bacterium altogether. This would be
expected to increase calcium oxalate stone risk and is being studied.
In humans, the genetic predisposition for stone formation is coupled with dietary issues
(problem foods include spinach, peanuts, chocolate, dairy products, calcium supplements,
vitamin C supplements, and tea). Dogs are more likely to eat simply a commercial brand
of dog food without nearly the dietary variety that humans experience. This means that
diet can often be used to manage the problem in the dog unless genetics (not diet) is the
cause.
There are some metabolic diseases that might predispose a dog to create a calcium
oxalate stone. For example, a dog with Cushing's disease will be overproducing cortisol
(commonly known as cortisone). This hormone increases calcium excretion in urine. The
extra calcium present in the urine will promote a stone. Some animals may have an
elevated blood calcium level (hypercalcemia) for any number of reasons, and this could
lead to excess calcium in the urine as the body attempts to restore calcium balance.
Again, extra calcium in the urine promotes a stone. Screening for such medical conditions
is important and is generally part of the medical workup once stones are detected on a
radiograph. If any such metabolic problems are uncovered, they will need to be treated
separately. As these problems are resolved, no further stone prevention measures should
be needed. Because of the complexity involving a variety of different causes and risk
factors, this should be viewed as a group of diseases that result in the same endpoint,
calcium oxalate stones. The specific cause does change what prevention measures are
expected to help. Clues based on the breed can help; but it can be very difficult to know
which disease and risk factors are present in any given dog, contributing to the high
recurrence rate of these stones in dogs.
Why Can’t The Stones Stay Where They Are?
The most immediate concern for the dog with bladder stones is that the urinary opening
may obstruct as the dog attempts to pass the stones. This is largely a male dog problem
but the results can be life-threatening uremic poisoning. In such cases, the veterinarian
will try to dislodge the stone, flushing it back into the bladder to restore the patency of the
urinary opening. If the stone cannot be dislodged, a new urinary opening may have to be
surgically created. The urethra (the narrow tube connecting the urinary bladder to the
outside world) is a difficult place to perform surgery, so it is preferable to move the stone
back into the bladder for removal rather than attempting removal from the urethra.
Bladder stones are irritating to the bladder simply by rubbing on the tender bladder lining.
Bleeding typically results, and, of course, the chance of developing chronic bladder
infections is markedly increased with the presence of bladder stones.
Because calcium oxalate stones cannot be dissolved by diet change, removing
the stones is usually necessary. Studies have shown that 50% of dogs who have
undergone such surgery will develop new calcium oxalate stones within three
years unless proper prevention is instituted.
The following therapeutic plan has been devised to minimize the chance of
recurrence after the stones have been removed.
Step One: Diet

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 2/6
Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
While special diets cannot dissolve
existing stones, they do help prevent new
stones from developing. Prevention
centers on creating a urinary
environment with minimal calcium and
oxalate as well as creating a urine pH
that is not conducive to calcium oxalate
formation. Further, high protein, high
sodium diets should not be used and
diets low in phosphorus may stimulate
vitamin D production and could increase
calcium absorption. Commercial
specialty foods with these requirements
are available. Work with your veterinarian
to find an appropriate diet.
For each of the commercially available diets, the canned form is preferable to dry to
increase water consumption and thus help dilute the urine. It is especially important to
avoid table scraps when caring for an oxalate stone-forming dog. Still, no one wants their
dog to live life without treats.
The following treats are acceptable for oxalate stone-forming dogs:
Plain, cooked chicken
Plain, cooked turkey
eggs
rice
peas
pasta
white potatoes
cabbage
cauliflower
bananas
melon
Selecting a diet that actually prevents stones but is also desirable to the picky pet may be
challenging. It may be possible to have a veterinary nutritionist provide a recipe for an
appropriate home-cooked diet. Please visit www.balanceit.com or www.petdiets.com for
details.
Some medications can increase the risk of calcium oxalate stone development, and these
should be avoided. Prednisone and other cortisone-type medications (commonly used for
itchy skin, arthritis, inflammatory bowel disease, and other inflammatory conditions)
should be avoided if possible. Furosemide (brand name: Lasix or Salix) is a diuretic mostly
used in the treatment of heart failure. Both these medications lead to excess calcium in
the urine. Should a diuretic be needed for a patient at risk for calcium oxalate stones, one
from the thiazide class (see later) would be a better choice. Supplementation with
Vitamins D or C also increases the risk of forming oxalate stones; such supplementation
should be discontinued.
Step Two: Urinalysis and Radiographs
Two to four weeks after surgery, a urine sample is checked and the bladder is
radiographed. If the urine is not adequately diluted (meaning the specific gravity is less
than 1.020), water consumption will have to be increased (either by adding water to the
food or increasing the amount of canned food).

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 3/6
If urinary pH is less than 6.5 or if oxalate crystals are seen, it is time to go to Step Three. If
all is well, a urinalysis should be performed every three to six months or so for the rest of
the dog’s life (the University of Minnesota’s current recommendation).
Radiographs are also taken every 6-12 months so that any new stones will still be small
enough to be retrieved from the bladder by flushing. If you skip this monitoring, you may
find stones have developed to a large size, and surgery is again needed to remove them.
Step Three: Potassium Citrate
By taking potassium citrate pills, citrate levels increase in the urine. Calcium binds to the
citrate instead of the oxalate. This is a desirable event since calcium citrate tends to stay
dissolved, whereas calcium oxalate tends to precipitate out as a mineral deposit.
Potassium citrate also helps create alkaline urine (in which calcium oxalate stones have
difficulty forming). Potassium citrate supplements are typically given twice a day.
Step Four: Urinalysis Again
Two to four weeks after potassium citrate is added to the therapeutic diet, a urine sample
is checked. If the urine is not adequately diluted, water consumption will have to be
increased either by adding water to the food or increasing the amount of canned food.
If urinary pH is less than 6.5 or if oxalate crystals are seen, it is time to go to Step Five. If
all is well, urinalysis and radiographs should be performed every 6-12 months or so for the
rest of the dog’s life (the University of Minnesota’s current recommendation). In other
words, if the urinalysis shows all the desired parameters and radiographs show no new
stones forming, then therapy is working, and the pet can go on a regular monitoring
schedule. If testing shows the patient is still predisposed to stone formation, it is
necessary to proceed down this list until control is achieved. Again, radiographs should be
taken every six to 12 months.
Step Five: Thiazide Diuretics
A diuretic is a medication designed to increase the amount of urine produced. The thiazide
class of diuretics does this in a way that reduces the calcium content of the urine. This
medication is typically given twice a day and electrolytes are generally measured via
blood test within the first two weeks of this treatment.
There will always be some dogs who continue to form stones no matter what is done. With
radiographic monitoring, it is hoped that new stones can be detected while they are still
small. As research continues, new developments may arise that will not require such
frequent monitoring.
A Note On The Bichon Frise
The Bichon Frise appears to have a unique situation with oxalate bladder stones in that
they seem to begin to recur virtually as soon as they have been removed. In a study
presented by Jody Lulich's group at the University of Minnesota at the 2004 meeting of the
American College of Veterinary Internal Medicine, 24 out of 33 Bichons had oxalate stone
recurrence after cystotomy (37% had had their first recurrence in the first year after
surgery, by the end of the second year 57% had recurred, and by the end of the third year
73% had recurred, some more than once). Steps to prevent recurrence need to be
particularly aggressive from the beginning in this breed as they seem to have 20 times the
risk of oxalate stone formation compared to other breeds.
Preventing Male Dog Obstruction
In male dogs, a bone called the os penis is located in the penis, surrounding the urethra.
Urine passes through this hollow bone like water through a pipe. Because this area is
made of bone, it cannot stretch or expand to accommodate a stone trying to pass. A stone
blockage of this type leads to an emergency and death if it goes untreated.

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 4/6
In a perfect world, controlling the bladder stones controls the risk of obstructions, but
controlling the bladder stones is not always easy, and treating a dog over and over for
obstruction becomes expensive. A surgical procedure called a urethrostomy can be
performed to prevent obstruction. This procedure involves creating a new urinary opening
in the area of the scrotum. This allows urine to be expelled earlier in its course so that
passage through the os penis does not occur. The flexibility of the non-bony part of the
urethra plus the surgically enlarged urinary opening allows for smaller stones to pass
rather than stick in the os penis.
To perform this surgery, the male dog must be neutered (which can be done at the time of
the urethrostomy). The creation of the new opening usually requires the removal of the
empty scrotum.
While this is not as good an outcome as preventing stone recurrence, at least the
emergency obstruction is prevented.
Calcium oxalate bladder stones can be frustrating. Not only do they tend to recur, but
following monitoring recommendations involves a visit to the veterinarian's office
every three to six months. It is up to every owner how rigid to be with guidelines, but keep
in mind that the trouble and expense of a stone surgery weigh against the much less
trouble and expense of monitoring.
Laser Lithotripsy
A new technique of stone removal involves the use of a laser to blast the stone into pieces
small enough to pass. This option (called laser lithotripsy) is especially useful when the
number of stones present is small and/or when a stone is lodged in the urethra and
cannot be flushed into the bladder. It will not be helpful for a large number of stones as the
process would be too time-consuming relative to a more conventional approach but for the
right patient, it is less invasive than other procedures.
Related resources
Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - January 6, 2025
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats - September 28, 2024
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats - December 25, 2023
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - October 5, 2023
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - June 19, 2023
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951533&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754287956
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 5/6

8/4/25, 11:43 AM Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951533&ind=499&objTypeID=1007 6/6

Image courtesy of MarVistaVet
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 05, 2023
Published: February 21, 2002
There are many types of bladder stones, and each type forms under specific
circumstances. In almost all cases, struvite bladder stones in dogs are caused by bladder
infection with specially enabled bacteria. Staphylococci (often simply called Staph) and
Proteus bacteria are the usual culprits, and they gain access to the bladder by simply
crawling up from the lower urinary tract.
85% of patients with struvite bladder stones are female.
Breeds felt to have an increased risk for the formation of struvite stones are the
Miniature Schnauzer, Shih Tzu, Yorkshire terrier, Labrador retriever, and
Dachshund.
The average age of patients with struvite bladder stones is 2.9 years.
Some patients with bladder stones show no
symptoms of any kind and the stones are
discovered incidentally but there are some
symptoms that might promote a search for
stones. Bloody urine, recurrent bladder
infection (especially by the same
organism and especially if Staphylococci or
Proteus is cultured), or straining to urinate all
would raise suspicion. Fortunately, struvite
stones are radio-opaque, which means they
show up readily on radiographs.
Occasionally stones are simply passed and discovered by the pet owner. If this occurs, it
is important to bring the stone to your vet's office for analysis, have the dog examined,
and have radiographs taken to check for more stones. Patient care will be highly
dependent on the stone's mineral composition.
When to Suspect Struvite Stones
Bladder stones come in several mineral
compositions. The most common stone
types are oxalate and struvite. Since the
approach is different for each type, it is
crucial to determine the stone type. The
stone type can be confirmed if a sample
stone is available (either passed naturally
or obtained via surgery, voiding
urohydropropulsion, or cystoscopy). A
laboratory analysis can easily determine
the content of the stone and even
determine if the stone consists of layers of

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951352&ind=500&objTypeID=1007 1/5
different mineral types. Without a sample Radiograph image courtesy of MarVistaVet
stone, there are still some hints that can be
obtained through other tests.
As mentioned, struvite stones in dogs are almost always formed because of the urinary
changes that occur with specific types of bladder infection: almost always Staphylococcal
infection but occasionally a Proteus infection. If a urine culture from a patient with a
bladder stone should grow either staph or proteus, this would make struvite more likely
than oxalate. Also, struvite requires an alkaline pH to form while oxalate requires an acid
pH to form; urine pH is a part of any urinalysis and thus provides another clue as to the
stone's identity.
An educated guess is better than nothing but does not replace the analysis of a stone.
Remember, occasionally a stone of one type forms around a stone of another type. A
complete analysis is needed to effectively prevent a recurrence.
How Do Struvite Stones Form?
Struvite is the name given to the crystal composed of magnesium, ammonium, and
phosphate. (Struvite is also occasionally referred to as “triple phosphate” due to an old
erroneous belief that the phosphate ion was bonded to three positive ions instead of just
magnesium and ammonium.) Struvite crystals are not unusual in normal urine, and their
presence alone does not require treatment. Combine them with certain bacteria, however,
and a stone is created.
Stone creation is made possible by an enzyme called urease that certain bacteria,
particularly Staphylococci and Proteus species, can produce. Urea is a substance seen in
large amounts in urine. Where does all this urea come from? In short, when the body
breaks down amino acids, it must contend with the ammonium that is generated in this
process. The ammonium, which would be toxic if left alone, is converted to urea, which is
much less toxic and is readily soluble in water, making for its easy disposal in urine.
Unfortunately, adding urease-positive bacteria into the urinary bladder converts the urea
back into ammonium. The combination of infection and inflammation caused by the
ammonium creates a matrix that traps the struvite crystals and gels into an actual stone.
This reaction can only take place in alkaline urine but the ammonium creates the perfect
pH for stone formation. In dogs, the general rule is, if there is no infection, there are no
struvite bladder stones.
There are a few rare exceptions to this rule. Certain antacids and diuretics can produce
struvite stones when there isn't any infection. A hormone imbalance called
hyperaldosteronism is associated with struvite stone development. The hereditary
situation of the English cocker spaniel also represents an exception, as in at least one
genetic line of this breed has the tendency to form a purely metabolic struvite stone has
been documented. These situations are rare, and for most patients, the focus of struvite
stone management is dealing with bladder infections and preventing future ones.
What Should Be Done About Struvite Bladder
Stones?
Struvite stones can be removed surgically
with a technique called voiding
urohydropropulsion; removed with a
cystoscope (if they are small enough); or
dissolved by diet (also called dissolution).
Stone dissolution with diet is the least
invasive and probably the best option unless
the patient really needs a faster treatment,

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951352&ind=500&objTypeID=1007 2/5
The English Cocker Spaniel has a unique genetic
predisposition to make struvite stones even without any
infection. Image courtesy of David Gjestson.
such as if there is a risk of urinary obstruction
in a male dog. Each approach has pros and
cons.
Dietary therapy to prevent new struvite
stones is of secondary importance in dogs (except the English Cocker spaniel, for which
this is a hereditary metabolic problem rather than a matter of infection). The focus is on
preventing infection. If your dog has a history of struvite bladder stones, be sure to discuss
long-term monitoring and understand what schedule of testing is best for your pet. Expect
periodic urine cultures to be needed.
Dietary Dissolution
Dietary dissolution of the stone is not only possible with struvite bladder stones, it is
actually the treatment of choice. There are several therapeutic diets available by
prescription from your veterinarian that are designed to dissolve struvite bladder stones
when they are in the bladder by creating urine that is not compatible with the solid state of
struvite.
A therapeutic diet must be the only food fed until the stone is dissolved. Antibiotics are
needed as long as stones are in the bladder (bacteria are encrusted within the stone and
as the stone dissolves, they are released). Every 4 to 6 weeks, new radiographs are taken
to evaluate the stone size. If it is at least 20 percent smaller, the process is continued. A
urinalysis is also checked to be sure the proper urinary conditions for dissolution are being
created by the diet.
On average, 2 to 3 months are needed to dissolve stones, but the diet should be
continued for a full month after the stones are no longer visible on radiographs because
small stones may not be large enough to see. Small stones are typically dissolved in just a
few weeks as long as the infection is controlled.
After the stones are dissolved, periodic (usually quarterly) urine cultures are performed to
check for infection recurrence. If stones do not shrink as expected on the dissolution diet,
they may not be pure struvite stones, and another method described below should be
selected.
The main advantage of the dissolution method is that it seems to be the lowest risk and
most comfortable approach for the dog. That said, an important disadvantage of the
dissolution approach is the possibility of urinary tract obstruction as the stone gets smaller
and gets lodged in the urethra on the way out. This is potentially a life-threatening hazard
for male dogs as they have a narrow urethra. The stone cannot be dissolved in the urethra
as, for dissolution to work, the stone must be immersed in urine, which is not the case in
the urethra. Furthermore, the inability to pass urine is an emergency, and the patient will
die of uremic poisoning in a matter of days if urine flow cannot be restored. The stone can
be pushed back into the bladder and dissolution re-attempted but at this point, it may be
best to go for a faster resolution with surgery, lithotripsy, cystoscopy,
or voiding urohydropropulsion.
Many dissolution diets are really high in fat and high in salt. They may not be appropriate
for patients with a past or current history of pancreatitis, patients with heart
disease, kidney insufficiency, or high blood pressure.
Surgery
Surgical removal is the most direct method. The advantage is that the stones are removed
and healing may commence all in one day. The chief disadvantages are those inherent to
surgery: anesthetic risks, post-operative pain, risk of contaminating the abdomen with
infected urine, the possibility that not all stones will be removed, and the possibility that
the bladder stitches will not properly hold. These risks are generally considered minor and

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951352&ind=500&objTypeID=1007 3/5
complications associated with cystotomy (opening of the urinary bladder) are unusual.
The patient usually stays in the hospital for a day or two to be sure urine production is
normal, to properly confine the patient, and to assess pain.
If the dog has urethral stones, they can usually be flushed back into the urinary bladder for
surgical removal. If the stone is lodged too tightly for this, it can be removed surgically
from the urethra, although the potential for urethral scarring usually makes this a lastchoice approach.
Voiding Urohydropropulsion
If the stones are small enough to pass, the bladder can be manipulated in a way to
promote expelling them through the urethra. This is called voiding urohydropropulsion and
involves filling the bladder, agitating it so the stones float freely in the urine, and then
generating a high-pressure urine stream to force the stones out. The patient must typically
be held vertically so that gravity may assist in the expulsion of the stones. This technique
only works if the stones are small and the patient is not too large. Sedation or general
anesthesia is needed. If there are numerous stones, several attempts are often needed if
this is to be the only means of removal. Often, this technique is used to obtain a sample
stone for analysis to determine if dietary dissolution is feasible.
Cystoscopic Retrieval/Laser Lithotripsy
If you wish to avoid surgery and the stones are small enough, a cystoscope can be
passed into the patient's bladder, and the stones retrieved with a basket (or fragmented
via laser lithotripsy). This requires specific equipment most clinics do not have, and thus,
usually needs referral to a specialty practice. It is generally more expensive than surgery,
though recovery time for the patient is typically much faster.
Recurrence
After stones are removed one way or another, the focus shifts to prevention. Often,
patients are somehow predisposed to a bladder infection, which means they are also
predisposed to form more struvite bladder stones. A stone can form as quickly as two
weeks after infection if a urease-positive bacterium sets in.
After surgery, antibiotics must be continued until the infection is confirmed to have cleared
(i.e., a negative urine culture is obtained). After this, a follow-up schedule of radiographs
and/or urine testing is recommended. For a single stone episode, only a few follow-up
visits may be necessary. Realize that some individual animals are predisposed to
recurring bladder infections, and they may form new struvite stones repeatedly. Obviously,
if stones were to recur, a more regular monitoring schedule would have to be revised.
Dietary therapy in the prevention of struvite stones is of secondary importance in dogs
(with the exceptions being the rare situations mentioned above). The focus is on
preventing infection. If your dog has had a history of struvite bladder stones, be sure to
discuss long-term monitoring and understand what testing schedule is best for your pet.
Expect periodic urine cultures to be needed.
Related resources
Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - January 6, 2025
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats - September 28, 2024
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats - December 25, 2023
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - June 19, 2023
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - June 1, 2022

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951352&ind=500&objTypeID=1007 4/5
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951352&pid=19239
f9063732-d4f6-43d0-a848-51b7d870481b.1754288042
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951352&ind=500&objTypeID=1007 5/5
Photo courtesy of Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats
Jacqueline Brister, DVM
Revised: December 15, 2023
Published: December 03, 2019
Bladder stones are solid mineral deposits
that form inside the bladder of dogs and cats
and are quite common. Stones start out as
crystals that form in the urine. Crystals form
when a combination of events take place,
such as urine pH change (pH is a measure
of acidity and alkalinity in urine), increased
urine concentration, and changes in the
mineral makeup of the urine produced by the
body. Over time, the crystals combine and
layer together to form bladder stones. The
process of forming bladder stones is called
urolithiasis or cystolithiasis, 
The number of bladder stones produced can
range from one or two stones to hundreds.
Some bladder stones are small and grit-like,
while others can grow to be larger than two
inches in diameter. Kidney stones, more common in humans, occur much less often in
dogs and cats. Only 2% of stones found in the urinary tract of our pets are found in the
kidney.
The two most common types of bladder stones are those made of calcium oxalate and
those made of struvite (also known as magnesium ammonium phosphate). Urate, cystine,
xanthine, calcium phosphate, and silica are other mineral types that can form bladder
stones but are rare.
Types of Bladder Stones
Struvite bladder stones can occur with bladder infections. Certain bacteria will change the
urine’s pH to reproduce faster. This pH change causes the urine to be more alkaline,
causing struvite crystals to form. Struvite stones can also form without an infection, which
is seen more commonly in cats than dogs.
Less is known about why struvite stones form without an infection. They often play a role
in idiopathic cystitis in cats (also known as feline lower urinary tract disease), a condition
associated with stress and straining to urinate.
Calcium oxalate stones tend to form with a more acidic pH and are rarely caused by
bacteria. Other types of stones can occur with toxins, such as antifreeze poisoning, or can
be breed-related, as occurs in Dalmatians.
Clinical Signs
Signs related to bladder stones include:

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9421365&ind=501&objTypeID=1007 1/4
 straining to urinate
 urinating small amounts more frequently
 dribbling urine
 urinating in unusual places
 vocalizing or crying when urinating
 licking the vulva or penis frequently
 urine may have a strong odor or show mucus or blood
Diagnosis
To diagnose bladder stones, your veterinarian will perform a thorough physical
examination. Sometimes large stones can be felt by your veterinarian during an exam
when they feel the belly (also called abdominal palpation) to check for normal organs
within the abdomen. Urine can be obtained to look for crystals, pH changes, and evidence
of infection. Radiographs, also called X-rays, are almost always necessary to confirm
bladder stones. Unfortunately, some stones do not show up well on X-rays, so your
veterinarian will also take into account any signs present during a physical exam and
examination of your pet’s urine.
Ultrasound is sometimes used to look for bladder stones, especially those invisible on Xrays. It can also be used to view any damage to the urinary tract from bladder stones.
Determining the type of mineral in a stone is difficult when looking at its shape or
appearance. Urine pH can provide clues, but this is not very accurate. To determine the
stone’s composition, it must be sent to a laboratory that does urolith analysis, and results
can take several weeks.
Treatment Options
Any infection will need to be treated. Depending on the type of stone, removing bacteria
that change the pH can prevent new stones from forming. Very small stones may dissolve
with normalized pH. Unfortunately, large stones create a perfect environment for bacteria
to live, so antibiotics may not be able to completely kill off all the bacteria. Some stones
are made of different layers of various minerals, so adjusting the urine pH by getting rid of
bacteria may not have a big impact on these "combination" bladder stones. Also of
concern, giving antibiotics in situations where all bacteria cannot be killed can potentially
cause antibiotic-resistant bacteria. That can make infection harder to control, even after
bladder stones are gone.
In some cases, usually with small stones and in combination with antibiotics for bacteria,
struvite stones can be dissolved by feeding a therapeutic diet recommended by your
veterinarian. This diet acidifies urine pH and restricts certain minerals such as magnesium
and phosphorus. Dissolving the stones can take between one week to two months,
depending on many factors. Calcium oxalate crystals cannot be dissolved with diet, but
specific therapeutic diets can change the urine environment such that enlargement or new
stone formation is less likely.
Sometimes, bladder stones migrate along the urinary tract and become lodged in the
urethra, which is the tube that leads from the bladder to outside your pet’s body (to the
hole from which they urinate). In such cases, your pet is at serious risk of a urethral
blockage, which prevents your pet from urinating. When this occurs, a method called
retropulsion (also called retrograde hydropulsion or hydropropulsion) may be attempted. A
urinary catheter is inserted into the urethra, and sterile saline (and sometimes lubricant) is
injected into the catheter to try to push the urethral stones into the bladder to allow for
easier removal.
Sometimes veterinarians will use retropulsion to try to remove small stones from the
bladder itself (in which case it may be called voiding hydropulsion or hydropropulsion).
The increased pressure of additional fluid in the bladder allows for small stones to pass

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9421365&ind=501&objTypeID=1007 2/4
easily and quickly out of the bladder and through the urethra with the extra fluid once the
catheter is removed.
If hydropulsion does not work and diet change is not an appropriate option for your pet,
surgery is needed to remove the bladder stones. This type of surgery is called a
cystotomy. Your veterinarian will surgically open the abdomen and bladder to physically
remove the stones. Sutures, also called stitches, or staples are used to close surgical
openings.
After surgery, recovery can take two to four weeks. Pets will often need pain medication
for at least one week. Pets are usually given antibiotics after surgery if they had a urinary
tract infection prior to surgery. Remember, more stones may form if the infection is not
cured. Your pet will need to be on restricted activity (this means no exercise, no running in
the house, going outside only on a leash, even to use the bathroom) for one to two weeks
following the surgery so they don’t damage the surgical sites or break internal sutures.
Urine may be blood-tinged for several days following surgery. Straining to urinate should
improve by two to three weeks after the surgery.
Lithotripsy, a method to fragment stones into a smaller size so they can be passed or
removed through the urinary tract, is extremely uncommon in veterinary medicine. The
procedure is only available at a few referral institutions and veterinary schools.
Increasing water intake by providing more water or adding canned food can also help with
bladder stones. Increased water allows for increased flushing of the bladder and dilution
of minerals within the urine.
Consequences
If left untreated, bladder stones can grow to the point that urinating is difficult or
impossible. This difficulty is especially problematic if stones become stuck in the
urethra. The inability to urinate is a life-threatening situation. Other issues associated with
bladder stones are chronic pain and an increased risk for urinary tract infections.
The inability to urinate is a life-threatening situation.
Prevention
Once your pet has had bladder stones, therapeutic diets selected for that specific stone
can help prevent recurrence. It is crucial that only the therapeutic food be given to your
pet. No additional treats (unless specific to the diet), bones, or flavored chew toys can be
given. Even a small change in the diet can change the pH and mineral content of the urine
and lead to the stones reforming. Increase water consumption as much as possible to
help dilute the urine to further decrease the chances of bladder stone formation.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9421365&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288067
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9421365&ind=501&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:44 AM Bladder Stones in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9421365&ind=501&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Graphic by MarVistaVet
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: November 06, 2023
Published: January 01, 2001
See article summary below. 
Note: From a practical standpoint, the
terms chronic kidney disease, chronic
renal failure, renal insufficiency, chronic
kidney failure, and kidney insufficiency all
mean the same thing. For simplicity's
sake in terms of this article, the term
kidney failure will be used to reflect all
these terms or conditions.
The kidney is an amazing organ. It is
designed to do a lot more than just make
urine and get rid of toxins. It also
manages hydration, blood pressure, red
blood cell production, pH balance in the
blood, calcium, and phosphorus balance, and
more. Kidneys are made up of millions of filtration
units called "nephrons" and we are born with vastly
more nephrons than we need to keep healthy. Over
time and age, however, nephrons get damaged
through the wear and tear of living and they die off.
We only need enough nephrons to fill up about 1/3
of one kidney to manage normal kidney function
and we start with two full kidneys packed with
working nephrons at first but there may come a
time when we just don't have enough anymore.
When we don't have enough working kidney tissue
to maintain normal function, we are said to have
"renal insufficiency," with "renal" being the medical
term for the kidney. Kidneys with insufficient
function need help to get their work done and a
long-term diseased kidney, regardless of its
function or lack thereof, has "chronic kidney
disease." Chronic kidney disease patients are
divided up by what stage of insufficiency they are
contending with and what symptoms they have.
Treatment is focused on preventing progression of the insufficient function in earlier
stages and on maintaining good life quality in later stages.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Excessive thirst is a warning sign
for poor kidney function.
Photo Courtesy of Morguefile.com
In the past, we used the term "chronic kidney failure" instead of "renal insufficiency" but
this wording sounded far too dramatic and evoked images of ongoing sickness, expensive
hospitalization, and doom when management could be as simple as diet change
depending on the stage at which the disease is discovered. Early detection is paramount
so let us review what the kidneys do and where they might need some help.
What our Kidneys Do/What Insufficient Kidneys Cannot Do
First, it is important to know what normal kidneys do. Kidney function goes far beyond
simply making urine. Kidneys are made of millions of processing units called nephrons.
These tiny little units are responsible for separating the chemicals you want to keep in
your body from the chemicals you need to dispose of. The chemicals to remove are
dissolved in water and make up the fluid we all know as urine. So here is what your
kidneys do for you and for your pet, what they become unable to do in renal insufficiency,
and some of the parameters your veterinarian will want to track.
Water Conservation
Hydration of the body depends not only on water
consumed but on water removed. In times of
dehydration, the kidney must respond by
conserving water. This means that all the materials
that the body needs to get rid of still need to be
removed, but the kidney needs to do so using the
smallest amount of water possible. Similarly, if you
drink too much water, the kidney needs to efficiently
remove it to prevent dilution of the bloodstream. A
pet with insufficient kidney function will not be able
to make concentrated urine and will need to drink
extra water to process the body's waste chemicals.
For this reason, excessive water consumption is an
important early warning sign and should always be
investigated.
When we analyze a urine sample, one of the most important parameters is the specific
gravity. It is a measure of how concentrated a urine sample is. Water has a specific gravity
of 1.000. A dilute urine sample has a specific gravity of less than 1.020 (often less than
1.010). A concentrated urine sample would have a specific gravity over 1.030 or 1.040. A
failing kidney, by definition, cannot make concentrated urine and the patient must drink
excessively to get enough water to get rid of the day’s toxic load.
Toxin Removal
The kidneys remove our metabolic wastes for us. If there is inadequate circulation going
through the kidneys or if there are not enough functioning nephrons to handle the waste
load, toxins will build up. When the toxins build up and exceed the normal range, a
condition called azotemia occurs. If the toxins build up to a level where the patient actually
feels sick, they have a condition called uremia. If we can keep our azotemic patients
below the uremia level, they will feel pretty normal and have good life quality.
The most important marker of uremia is called creatinine. Creatinine is a by-product of
muscle breakdown and is always in small amounts in the bloodstream. The kidney
removes it continuously unless there is a kidney function problem. A newer parameter
called SDMA (symmetrical dimethylarginine) becomes abnormal much earlier than
creatinine does and is becoming more commonly tracked. We are able to stage a patient's
kidney disease based on creatinine blood level and SDMA level (see the staging section
below). Another marker is the BUN, which stands for blood urea nitrogen. This parameter
is similar to creatinine but is influenced by dietary protein as well as kidney function.
These three markers are central to determining the severity of a kidney problem.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Calcium/Phosphorus Balance
The balance between calcium and phosphorus in the blood is really important. Too much
of one or the other will lead to crystals forming in body tissues and bones to the extent
that they may actually become rubbery. The kidney plays an important role in this balance
and when kidney function is lost, phosphorus levels begin to rise. Therapy for insufficient
kidney function requires monitoring phosphorus levels and the use of diet and medications
to keep phosphorus levels in a reasonable range.
Sodium/Potassium Balance
The kidney plays a major role in controlling electrolyte balance as well. In particular,
conserving potassium is an important aspect. Insufficient kidneys lose their ability to
conserve potassium and potassium levels begin to drop, leading to weakness. Potassium
supplements are commonly needed in the treatment of kidney failure.
Blood Pressure Regulation
Blood pressure sensors in the kidney help regulate blood pressure in the body. When
these are damaged, hypertension (high blood pressure) can result and can damage the
kidney even more. Blood pressure is commonly measured in kidney failure patients.
Protein Conservation
There are a lot of important proteins circulating in the bloodstream and it is crucial that
they are not lost in the urine. The nephron possesses a filtration system that keeps the
protein in while removing harmful wastes. If this filtration system is damaged (glomerular
disease) then a much more severe form of kidney failure results. Screening for this
damage is an important aspect of staging kidney failure and a test called a urine protein:
creatinine ratio is often included in the testing profile to assess this condition.
Red Blood Cell Production
The kidney produces a hormone called erythropoietin. This hormone tells the bone
marrow to make more red blood cells. In the absence of this hormone, non-responsive
anemia occurs and can get so bad that a transfusion is necessary. Erythropoietin can be
given by injection to treat this problem but there are some potential pitfalls in doing this as
will be discussed in a later article. Hematocrit and packed cell volume (PCV) are
measures of red blood cell volume commonly monitored in kidney patients.
pH Balance
Metabolic processes require a narrow pH range for efficiency. The kidney also regulates
this balance and if it cannot, intervention, usually in the form of fluid therapy, is necessary.
That's a lot of tasks for a pair of kidneys to handle! With chronic kidney disease/renal
insufficiency, chances are at least one of these tasks is not moving along smoothly. There
may or may not be any symptoms when the disease is discovered but the goal is to slow
the progression to the point where symptoms develop. If there already are symptoms, the
goal becomes controlling the symptoms and maintaining good life quality.
Once kidney disease has been discovered, the next step is staging and evaluating any
other aspects of the above function list that may not have been covered. Typically animals
need special food and possibly medications depending on symptoms. Very advanced
cases will likely need hospitalization, intravenous fluids, and possibly assisted feeding to
get to where they can resume a more normal life at home. As mentioned, early screening
is especially important as it is much easier to slow the progression of disease than it is to
reverse it.
STAGING KIDNEY DISEASE

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 3/7
Kidney disease is either discovered via wellness screening tests of apparently healthy
animals or during the course of the evaluation of patient illness. As mentioned, what we do
for the patient will depend on the stage of the disease. The International Renal Interest
Society (IRIS) has determined a staging system based on the creatinine level and SDMA
level found on a blood test (see Toxin Removal section above). Patients in Stage 1 or 2
rarely have any symptoms related to their disease and those in Stage 3 or 4 usually have
symptoms to control.
The chart below stages dogs and cats according to their Creatinine and SDMA levels.
Once the patient has been staged then further testing for "sub-staging" begins.
Table 1: Creatinine Values for Each IRIS Stage listed in US, International, and SDMA Units
Units
Stage I
(prefailure)
Stage II
(mild failure)
Stage III
(moderate
failure)
Stage IV
(severe
failure)
Dog
mg/dl
μmol/l
SDMA μg/dl
<1.4
<125
<18 mcg/dl
<1.4-2.8
<125-250
<18-35 mcg/dl
<2.9-5.0
<251-440
<36-54 mcg/dl
>5.0
>440
>54 mcg/dl
Cat
mg/dl
μmol/l
SDMA μg/dl
<1.6
<140
<18 mcg/dl
<1.6-2.8
<140-250
<18-25 mcg/dl
<2.9-5.0
<251-440
<26-38 mcg/dl
>5.0
>440
>38 mcg/dl
Sub-staging of kidney disease involves screening for urine protein loss and measuring
blood pressure. A urine protein: creatinine ratio is performed on a urine sample and the
protein amount is classified as either non-proteinuric, borderline proteinuric, or proteinuric.
Blood pressure is checked and the patient is classified as normotensive (normal),
borderline hypertensive, hypertensive, or severely hypertensive. The ultimate
classification for the patient will reflect all of these things ("Stage 3, non-proteinuria,
normotensive" would be an example). Further testing and monitoring are determined
based on what the actual parameters are. For more details on these substages, see the
articles on glomerular disease, and hypertension.
Stage I is mostly for pets that are known to have kidney disease based on abnormal
ultrasound or their slightly elevated SDMA. We check their blood pressure and urinary
protein levels, and screen for urinary tract infections. If abnormalities are found, they are
usually checked quarterly for any sign of progression.
Stage 2 is where diet change to a renal diet is typically recommended with the idea being
that the earlier this is started, the more likely the pet will accept it. The same type of
screening is performed as with Stage I, only now we need to start watching the
phosphorus levels so they don't rise above 4.6 mg/dl. Also, potassium levels may begin to
drop especially in cats. Both of these factors are helped by using a renal supportive diet
but if that proves inadequate, medications may become needed.
In Stage 3, the patient is likely to be showing some symptoms such as reduced appetite or
occasional nausea. In addition to the tests of Stages I and 2, it is in Stage 3 that we start
paying attention to red blood cell numbers and blood pH. This is a good time to consider
the use of calcitriol (active vitamin D supplementation) if one is going to do so.
In Stage 4, the patient is almost certainly showing symptoms and it becomes important to
be sure the patient is eating enough calories to maintain a healthy weight. Similar
concerns exist as for the first three stages but a phosphorus level of 4.6 mg/dl is probably
unrealistic at this point and a better goal is 6.0 mg/dl. Fluid support at home is a good
idea. This may mean adding water to the food, giving fluids under the skin (subcutaneous
fluids), or even a stint of hospitalization and IV fluids to drive the numbers down.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 4/7
Many patients are not diagnosed with kidney disease until they are far past a creatinine of
5.0 mg/dl. It is not unusual for sick patients to come to the vet and have creatinine values
of 10 mg/dl or higher. At this point, more aggressive treatment will be needed to stabilize
the patient and the goal is going to be improving the dysfunction to a level where the
patient has acceptable life quality and comfort at home. Transitioning to a new lifestyle will
take some time. (For example, appetite and comfort must be restored but changing to a
renal support diet may be something for further down the treatment path when more
stability has been achieved).
A Note on Pyelonephritis
Pyelonephritis is another name for kidney inflammation and usually means kidney
infection. Patients get kidney infections when a bladder infection goes unnoticed or
incompletely treated long enough and the bacteria go up the ureters into the kidney where
they set up shop and cause damage and pain. This form of kidney failure has the most
potential to reverse or partially reverse, so it is important to culture the urine for it early.
Urinalysis is frequently unable to detect infection in this situation as the patient drinks so
much water that the visible markers of infection are diluted out and cannot be found. The
infection also will produce a significant amount of urinary protein so the patient will be substaged incorrectly if an infection is not ruled out.
A Special Note on Ureteral Stones
The ureter is the tube that connects the kidney to the bladder and urine should constantly
be flowing through it. Often in age (plus with calcium/phosphorus imbalance),
mineralization will occur in the kidney. This may or may not be a problem depending on
how big and how plentiful the mineral deposits are but sometimes a mineral deposit will
break off and get lodged in a ureter. This can obstruct the ureter completely and the
backlog can destroy the kidney. Or it can partially obstruct the ureter, causing obstruction
and then the relief of obstruction as it rolls down the ureter and (hopefully) into the bladder
where it will not cause trouble. A spike in creatinine can be a clue that this has happened
and if one acts quickly intervention may be possible. For this reason, some kind of
imaging of the kidneys is recommended early in the course of kidney disease and
periodically after.
The bottom line is that there is a wide range of treatments when a patient has insufficient
kidney function and a lot of monitoring is needed to keep on top of all the aspects. Each
patient will have a different stage and a different constellation of issues to contend with.
Some will need only a diet change, and some will need ongoing fluid therapy at home or
hospitalization. The prognosis depends on all the factors involved. Your veterinarian will
let you know what your particular pet needs and will be watching many different lab tests
to keep control of your pet's condition.
In Summary:
From a practical standpoint, the terms chronic kidney disease, chronic
renal failure, renal insufficiency, chronic kidney failure, and kidney
insufficiency all mean the same thing.
The kidney’s job is more than just to make urine and get rid of toxins.
Additionally, the kidney manages hydration, blood pressure, red blood cell
production, pH balance in the blood, calcium and phosphorus balance, and
more.
Over time, kidney cells can become damaged. When there is not enough
working kidney tissue to maintain normal function, it is called “renal failure”.
A long-term diseased kidney, regardless of its function or lack thereof, has
"chronic kidney disease."

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 5/7
Hydration of the body depends not only on water consumed but on water
removed. In times of dehydration, to keep this balance, the kidney will
remove the toxins using the smallest amount of water needed.
If over-hydrated, the kidney must remove excess water to prevent dilution
of the bloodstream.
A failing kidney cannot make concentrated urine, and the patient must
drink excessively to get enough water to get rid of the day’s toxic load.
Excess water consumption by your pet could be an early warning sign of
kidney disease.
If there is inadequate circulation going through the kidneys or if there are
not enough functioning kidney cells to handle the waste load, toxins will
build up.
If concerned about possible kidney disease and toxin levels, your
veterinarian will order a urinalysis and blood work for your pet. Markers in
the urine and blood will show the presence and severity of a kidney
problem.
Levels of kidney disease are labeled by “stages,” i.e., I (pre-failure), II
(mild failure), III (moderate failure), IV. (severe failure). How far the disease
has progressed will determine treatment.
Treatments can be combinations of fluid therapy, diet changes,
medications, and possibly vitamin supplementation. On-going examinations
and laboratory tests will be a part of the treatment as your pet is monitored
for changes to their condition.
Prognosis depends on the stage of the disease and factors involved.
Back to top
©2024 Veterinary Information Network , Inc.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951452&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288096
®

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 6/7
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951452&ind=502&objTypeID=1007 7/7

Illustration by Wendy Brooks, DVM
Ectopic Ureters in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 25, 2023
Published: October 29, 2009
If you are reading this information, the chances are that you have a puppy (probably
female) with urinary incontinence and you have been told that she may have ectopic
ureters. Most likely, your puppy has not responded completely to treatment for bladder
infection nor to the usual urinary incontinence treatments, and seems to have more than
just a house-breaking problem. If she really does have an ectopic ureter or even two, the
only chance at resolving the incontinence is through surgery. This is expensive and often
unsuccessful, so it is important for you to know what you're getting into.
What are Ectopic Ureters?
Before it is possible to understand ectopic ureters,
one must understand the normal anatomy of the
urinary tract. The two kidneys sit in the lower back
where they are at work every moment of our lives
from cradle to grave. The kidneys are a very
advanced waste filtration system where the end
product is urine: a water-based solution into which
the body’s waste chemicals are dissolved.
Urine is made continuously and transported to the
urinary bladder for storage. The tiny pipelines
through which the urine is transported from the
kidney to the bladder are the ureters (one for the
left kidney and one for the right). The bladder
stores the urine until it can be voluntarily
unloaded. The chute that connects the bladder
with the outside world is the urethra.
This is a good system, and it works well most of
the time. We constantly filter unwanted wastes,
yet we do not dribble urine constantly. We store
our urine until we want to use it for territorial
marking or perhaps until it is simply sanitary and
convenient to get rid of it.
Ectopic ureters are an embryological error when this tract is developing. Instead of
connecting to the bladder, the ureters connect to the urethra, the vagina, the colon, or
even the uterus. The ureters are thus bringing urine to an area unequipped for urine
storage so leaking results. Incontinence and infection are the usual outcomes. Most
affected animals are female, and often there are multiple internal urinary anatomical
abnormalities.
Signs of Ectopic Ureters
The patient is usually a female puppy under the age of one year with the following:

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952887&ind=503&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Puppy with ectopic ureters (both right and left). Contrast dye
shows the kidneys and ureters. There is no contrast in the bladder,
indicating the urine bypasses the bladder. (Photo courtesy of Dr.
Sarah Cooper)
Urine leaking or dribbling at times but normal urination at other times.
Licking of the genital area; often urine leakage has caused a rash in this area.
Bladder infection is in 64% of ectopic ureter patients.
It should be noted that an uncomplicated bladder infection would cause all of the above as
well and would be a far more common explanation.
Ectopic ureters are rare, and it is important to look for more common explanations for the
above. Many puppies demonstrate submissive urination or have house-breaking problems
and these should be ruled out as well. A urinalysis and culture will determine if the dog
has a bladder infection and if so, which antibiotics will work against it. A basic blood panel
will assess kidney function.
If the incontinence and/or infection continues despite appropriate treatment, further
diagnostic steps will be needed.
Radiographs – Plain and Contrast
A plain radiograph (X-ray) would be
the next step after urine evaluation. A
radiograph is like a photograph only
instead of using light to expose a
piece of film, X-rays are used to
expose the film. Visible abnormalities
with the shape or size of the kidneys
can be seen as can certain types of
bladder stones. The problem is that
even when enlarged by disease, the
ureters themselves are still too small
to be seen on a radiograph; special
contrast is needed.
Contrast media are special dyes,
often iodine-based. On a radiograph,
they appear white and are used to
highlight small structures or separate
overlapping structures.
The Intravenous Pyelogram (I.V.P.)
The I.V.P. is a contrast radiographic
study used to identify the ectopic ureters. After fasting, the patient is given an enema to
ensure that the GI tract is cleared of any contents that might obscure the view of the tiny
ureters. Contrast dye is given intravenously, and radiographs are taken that show the dye
moving through the kidneys, the ureters, and into the bladder. The normal ureter can be
seen on its course to the bladder in this way. This test is associated with 60-70 percent
accuracy.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound uses the echoes of sound waves to
create an image. With an experienced imager, the
accuracy of ultrasound in the diagnosis of ectopic
ureters is similar to that of the I.V.P. The normal
ureter is too small to be seen with ultrasound but
the tiny squirt of urine from the ureter into the
bladder is generally visible. If the ureter is distended
(often the case with ectopic ureters), this could be
seen using ultrasound. Ultrasound is less invasive
to the patient than the I.V.P. but not as accurate.
Ultrasound is mostly used to evaluate the urinary

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952887&ind=503&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Endoscope (long probe with camera) used for
cystoscopy
tract for other conditions that should not be missed
in the course of the workup. To answer the question
about whether there are ectopic ureters, ultrasound
is not the best bet for that.
Contrast Enhanced Computed Tomography (CAT or CT Scan) In humans, CT scanning is
the diagnostic method of choice for the diagnosis of ectopic ureters. It is highly accurate
and reveals the exact location of the ureter attachment. This form of imaging will be more
accurate than ultrasound or I.V.P. but is not available as widely, requires general
anesthesia, and is likely more costly than the aforementioned procedures.
Cystoscopy
Cystoscopy is generally used to clear up cases where one simply is not sure if there is an
ectopic ureter or not after the above testing. Cystoscopy employs a tiny camera on the
end of a probe which can be used inside the urethra, vagina, or bladder to locate the
ureteral openings. Patients should weigh at least seven pounds for this procedure and,
since most hospitals are not equipped for cystoscopy, a referral is likely needed. Another
disadvantage of cystoscopy is that it does not evaluate the upper urinary tract. Since the
state of the kidneys is an important piece of information, an ultrasound would be a nice
complementary test to get the full story of what is going on in the patient's urinary tract
higher up.
An advantage of cystoscopy is that laser surgery can often be performed on the same
anesthesia thus confirming and correcting the problem all in one procedure.
Treatment of the Ectopic Ureter
The moment of truth comes with surgical exploration (or cystoscopy) with the intent to
correct the incontinence. With surgery, the patient’s urinary bladder will be opened and the
ureteral openings located. With cystoscopy, the cystoscope camera goes into the bladder
and locates the ureteral openings. Some ectopic ureters go to the bladder as they are
supposed to but instead of entering the bladder, simply course along the outside of the
bladder to end elsewhere. During surgery, both ureters are identified and followed to their
terminal points. One of the following surgical techniques will be used depending on where
the ureters are going.
Neoureterostomy (read “neo-ureterostomy”) This word literally means
“new-ureter-opening,” which is
somewhat self-explanatory. This
procedure is used for ureters that
attach to the bladder but do not
actually enter the bladder (as
described above). Here, an opening
into the bladder is made where the
ureter attaches but has failed to
penetrate. The part of the ureter
beyond this opening is removed. This
sounds simple enough but removing
that extra piece of ureter actually
involves a great deal of manipulation
through the very important bladder
sphincter. Sphincter scarring or other
damage can result from the
manipulation. Often incontinence is a
continuing problem even after surgery
and further treatment is needed.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952887&ind=503&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Candidate for neoureterostomy. Illustration by Dr. Wendy Brooks.
Candidate for Neoureterocystostomy. Ectopic ureters that
attach this way are said to be "extramural" while those that
attach to the bladder without properly penetrating are said
to be "intramural". Illistration by Dr. Wendy Brooks
A more successful approach is to use
cystoscopy and a laser to cut back the
ureter to a more appropriate opening.
Better continence is generally achieved in this way though facilities with appropriate
equipment may not be generally available. See below for information on LASER Ablation.
Neoureterocystostomy (read “Neouretero-cystostomy”)
This word means “new-ureter and bladder
opening.” This technique is used for
ureters that bypass the urinary bladder
totally and connect elsewhere. The
offending ureter is located, tied off, and
gently teased away from its inappropriate
connection so as to preserve its blood
supply. A new opening in the urinary
bladder is made, and the ureter is pulled
through, snipped short, and sewn in place,
being sure not to twist it. There is usually
swelling at the site of the new attachment,
which interrupts the urine flow into the
bladder and can distend the ureter. Urine
may back up into the kidney and cause
damage to the kidney. The swelling
generally has resolved after six weeks but
if both ureters undergo the same
procedure at the same time, then both
kidneys may suffer enough damage to
lead to kidney failure.
Nephroureterectomy (read “nephro-ureteretomy”)
Nephroureterectomy means removal of
the kidney and ureter, a self-explanatory definition. If the kidney is so infected or diseased
as to be useless, it is just as well to remove the ureter and the entire kidney. This
procedure would not be undertaken unless the other kidney was normal or near normal.
Complications
Several days of hospitalization are required after any of these surgeries; the patient will
not be going home the next day. Expect antibiotics and pain relief medications for home
use. If cystoscopy and laser ablation are used, however, these patients often do go home
the same day as their procedure.
Most patients will have urinary straining and some discomfort after surgery. A urinary
catheter is generally in place for a day or two after surgery to prevent bladder distension
during the first days of healing.
Incontinence is likely to continue after surgery but in 55 percent of dogs, it was improved.
Several studies have been done to determine the incidence of total incontinence
resolution and depending on the study 33-58 percent actually were free of their
incontinence. With anatomy corrected, however, medication for urinary incontinence is
likely to be much more successful than it would have been prior to surgery.
If incontinence is still intractable two to three months after surgery, a new I.V.P. should
assess the surgical result. Surgical procedures to specifically address urinary
incontinence can be performed.
Alternatives to Surgery

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952887&ind=503&objTypeID=1007 4/5
LASER Ablation
Because of the special equipment needed, LASER ablation is only available in limited
locations. LASER ablation is best used for intramural ectopic ureters. These are ureters
that start to enter the bladder where they are supposed to but do not actually penetrate all
the way in. Instead they continue inside the bladder wall and open up in the urethra or
vagina. It is the tunneling effect that makes this particular type of ectopic ureter difficult to
address with conventional surgery as described above.
A less invasive approach with less post-treatment incontinence involves using a
cystoscope and a LASER. The cystoscope is a long instrument with a camera on the end
that can be guided up the urethra to where the opening of the ectopic ureter can be seen.
A LASER can be used to cut the ectopic ureter back to the level of the bladder. Most
patients are able to leave the hospital within 24 hours and are completely continent. Males
typically remain continent but some 40 percent of females ultimately require additional
treatment to remain continent. This represents an improvement over results obtained with
neoureterostomy.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952887&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288121
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952887&ind=503&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Graphic courtesy Shalini Radhakrishnan/VIN
Ectopic Ureters in Dogs and Cats
Shalini Radhakrishnan, Veterinary Student Class of 2023
Published: July 22, 2020
What is it?
An ectopic ureter is a birth defect in
which one or both ureters in the
kidneys connect to an abnormal
location. This defect leads to the most
common complaint: difficulty in house
training and the pet leaking pee
(urine). Ectopic ureters cause
involuntary dribbling of pee,
uncontrollable need to pee
(urination), and urinary tract
infections. Ongoing urinary tract
infections can be fatal if they reach
the kidneys, so it is important to
diagnose and correct the ureter
placement through surgery.
Normal Anatomy
Each animal has two kidneys, which
make urine. Each kidney has a
collection tube, called the ureter, that
connects to the bladder at a location
named the trigone. Urine is emptied from the bladder through a single tube called the
urethra. Therefore, urine moves from the kidneys, through the ureters, and into the urinary
bladder, where the urine is stored until the pet purposely pees. When urination occurs,
urine empties through the urethra outside the body.
Two Types
There are two types of ectopic ureters based on where these collection tubes connect
inside the pet's body. Ectopic ureters do not connect and open at the bladder trigone, as
they do in a normal animal.
Intramural ectopic ureter:
This type is the most common type in dogs. The collection tubes attach to the bladder at
the trigone but then tunnel through the bladder wall, finally opening downstream from the
bladder (i.e., the urethra).
Extramural ectopic ureter:
This type is rare in dogs but more common in cats. This is when the ureters pass the
bladder and connect and open downstream from the bladder. This connection can be
further along the urinary tract or even to the reproductive tract (i.e., urethra or vagina).

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9739266&ind=504&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Graphic courtesy Shalini Radhakrishnan/VIN
Who Gets it?
An ectopic ureter is an abnormality
that occurs while the fetus is
developing. It is a rare abnormality in
dogs, and even less common in cats.
It is most commonly seen in young
pets because that is the age when
signs are first noticed.
Cats
Sex: Both females and males
equally
Breeds: Himalayan, Persian,
Maine Coon
Age: Mostly young pets
Dogs
Sex: Females nine times
more likely than males
Breeds: Labrador Retriever,
Golden Retriever, Siberian
Husky, West Highland White
Terrier, Miniature Poodle,
Newfoundland, and Soft
Coated Wheaten Terriers
Age: Mostly young pets
What are the signs?
Urine leakage or dribbling (incontinence)
Hard to house train; lots of accidents
Urinary tract infection, more common in females
Licking of genital area
Rash on the genital area
Urine staining and genital area is persistently wet
Male dogs can have fewer signs and develop signs of urinary incontinence later
in life.
Not all cats and dogs will show signs.
How is it Diagnosed?
A complete physical exam and basic diagnostic tests, such as a complete blood count,
blood chemistry, and urine analysis and culture will be done first.
Diagnosis requires imaging. The method chosen depends on availability, training of the
person doing the imaging, and your animal’s specific case. There is no one imaging
method that is the best, and multiple methods may be needed.
Radiographs and ultrasound are two imaging methods that show the kidney shape and
size.
Contrast CT and cystoscopy are two methods that are gaining popularity as they give a
better visual of the ureters. Cystoscopy is a procedure where a small camera is placed at
the pet’s urethral opening and goes into the body looking for the ureter openings. It gives
the veterinarian a great visual of where the abnormality is located.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9739266&ind=504&objTypeID=1007 2/4
The type of ectopic ureter, location, and size have no effect on the prognosis and outcome
of treatment. However, imaging is necessary to determine which surgical procedure to
perform and the surgical approach the veterinarian will use.
Radiographs are usually readily available and cost-effective, but have limited
ability to identify specifics.
Ultrasounds are non-invasive, visualize much of the urinary tract, and are
relatively readily available. Your veterinarian may be able to diagnose ectopic
ureters with ultrasounds, but it may be difficult to visualize the lower urinary
tract
CT scans provide a good visual of the entire urinary tract but are expensive and
not always available
Cystoscopy provide a good visual of the entire lower urinary tract and
sometimes a repair can be done right then. It is not always available.
What is the Surgery and Treatment?
The type of surgery used to correct the misplaced ureter depends on its location. Studies
show that there is no significant increase in risk or complications between any of the
surgeries. All the surgical options have similar long-term outcomes.
Ureteroneocystostomy
This procedure forms a new ureter and bladder opening. The surgery fixes the extramural
type by creating a new bladder opening for the ureter in the correct spot. This surgery may
cause swelling of the ureter during healing, but it will resolve in a few weeks.
Ureteronephrectomy
This procedure removes the ureter and kidney. The surgery is done on patients that also
have a nonfunctional or chronically infected kidney attached to it. However, it can be
difficult to tell if a questionable kidney is not functioning.
Laser Cystoscopy
This surgery is a new method specific to treating the intramural type. The laser cuts a new
ureter opening into the bladder at the normal area. Surgery is less expensive because it
can be done right after the initial cystoscopic diagnosis, while the patient is still under
general anesthesia.
What is the Aftercare and Long-term Outcome?
Depending on the type of surgery, the aftercare and time of recovery may vary. The main
post-surgical problems are continued uncontrolled peeing, leakage of pee into the body,
swelling at the surgical site, and urinary tract infection. Studies show uncontrolled peeing
resolves in cats that get a ureteronephrectomy. For dogs undergoing any of the surgeries
for the birth defect, almost half will still have urinary leakage. If this occurs, additional
medications will be needed for the rest of the pet’s life to help control urination.
It is not clear why some animals have continued urine leakage after surgery. Pets affected
with ectopic ureters should not be bred.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=9739266&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288149
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9739266&ind=504&objTypeID=1007 3/4
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:45 AM Ectopic Ureters in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=9739266&ind=504&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 22, 2021
Published: December 30, 2002
See article summary below
(Urinary protein loss due to kidney
inflammation)
When a patient, human or non-human, is
said to have kidney failure, renal
insufficiency, or even chronic renal failure,
what most people are talking about is a
toxin build up when the kidney cannot
adequately remove the body’s harmful
wastes. This toxic state is called uremia
and is associated with nausea, appetite
loss, weight loss, listlessness, and other
unpleasant issues. It is also not the kind
of kidney disease we are going discuss
here.
Glomerular disease is a completely
different kind of kidney disease and may
not involve any toxin build up at all.
Glomerular disease is one of protein loss.
What is a Glomerulus Anyway?
Consider for a moment what an important resource protein is to your body. Your blood, for
example, is full of necessary circulating proteins handling clotting, fluid balance,
transporting other chemicals etc. Your body went to a lot of trouble to build those proteins
and you can't afford to waste them. If you were to lose them, your body would have to
break down muscle in order to recreate them because that is how important they are.
On the other hand, your blood carries an assortment of metabolic wastes that you need to
get rid of. You need to filter out these bad materials without losing what is valuable. The
millions of glomeruli you have are in charge of keeping your blood proteins where they
belong — in the blood — while allowing for smaller wastes and extra fluid to filter out and
be made into urine. There are other valuables in your blood besides cells and protein, but
different areas of your kidney handle those.
The illustration to the right shows the nephron, which is the functional unit of the kidney.
There are millions of these making urine every moment of every day. Only about 30
percent of them must be working in order to maintain normal kidney function. The rest

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 1/7
This depiction of a nephron shows a glomerulus
and blood vessels (part of the nephron). The
kidney has millions of nephrons all doing the
kidney's work. Graphic by MarVistaVet.
form a back up system so that we will have plenty
of extra nephrons should some of them get
plugged with debris, damaged by scarring or
infection, or starved for oxygen during a traumatic
event.
The glomerulus, which in a way looks like a little
dandelion tuft, is where our interest lies today.
Blood flows through an afferent arteriole into the
glomerulus. Inside the glomerular tuft, the blood
vessel narrows into a complicated spiral of tiny
capillaries, so small that the blood cells pass
through single file. The capillaries are gripped by
cells called podocytes. Like hands, the podocytes
have tiny fingers (ironically called foot processes)
that encase the capillaries. Fluid and small
molecules can flow in between the fingers while
cells and large molecules like proteins cannot
pass through.
The cells and large molecules/proteins exit the
glomerulus through an efferent arteriole and
return to normal circulation. This first step in
filtration is driven both by blood pressure as well as by the protein content of the blood.
Now imagine what would happen if there were holes punched in that filtration system so
that protein can pass through the fingers. This is what happens in glomerular disease.
How does the Glomerulus get Leaky?
Sources of chronic inflammation are believed to be the ultimate cause of the problem. The
chronic inflammatory state leads to the circulation of antigen:antibody complexes in the
blood and these complexes stick in delicate glomerular membranes like flies in fly paper.
Once stuck there, they call in other inflammatory cells and soon a hole is eaten into the
membrane by the ensuing reaction. The holes in the filtration membranes are big enough
for proteins to traverse.
There are many possible sources of chronic inflammation that could be generating
antigen:antibody complexes. Chronic ear or skin infections could be the cause. Longstanding dental disease could do it. A latent, more internal infection might be the cause
(such as heartworm, Lyme disease, prostate infection, or Ehrlichiosis). Even a tumor
might generate enough of the immune system’s attention to lead to this sort of reaction. If
it is at all possible to identify and resolve the underlying cause of inflammation, this should
be done as other therapy is unlikely to fully resolve the protein loss.
How is the Diagnosis Made?
There are several common scenarios that might lead to the diagnosis but they all boil
down to one or both of two findings: excess urine protein found on a routine urinalysis
and/or low albumin found on a blood test.
Let’s start with excess urine protein found on a routine urinalysis.
A urinalysis examines a urine sample for some of its chemical contents and properties.
Protein content is one of the parameters that is checked and reported as a small, medium
or large amount. On a urinalysis report this will be designated as “+,” “++,” or “+++.”
This seems like it would be easy enough to interpret but unfortunately there is more to the
story. A small amount of protein in a well-concentrated sample may be normal while the
same amount of protein in a dilute sample would be highly significant. How dilute or
concentrated the urine is depends on the patient’s water consumption, and we need a

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Drawing Courtesy Tamara Rees
method to examine urine protein that is
independent of the water consumption.
Further, we need to determine if any
protein in the urine is truly coming from
the kidneys; after all, a bladder infection
or other bladder condition might generate
urine protein. To help distinguish renal
protein loss, the rest of the urinalysis will
be helpful. When your veterinarian is
confident that other issues with the
urinary tract have been excluded, it is
time for a urine protein:creatinine ratio
(we will come back to this).
Low Blood Albumin Level found on a
Blood Panel
Albumin is one of those proteins that the
body really wants to conserve and here's
why. There are plenty of substances the
body needs to circulate that simply are
not water soluble. How do we circulate
these things if they won't dissolve in
water? We bind them to a carrier protein
that will circulate and carry them as if they
were commuters on a city bus. The
albumin molecule is that city bus, carrying
important biochemicals around your body.
There's more. Albumin also is important in
keeping water in the bloodstream. This
sounds odd but blood is basically a liquid
and without enough water, it sludges and
clots abnormally. Furthermore, if water is
not held in the vasculature, it leaks into
other body cavities such as the chest and
abdomen, filling these cavities with liquid.
Your body prioritizes the maintenance of
its albumin levels and will not allow them
to drop. When the albumin levels are down, a serious protein loss is afoot. It could be
intestinal or liver-related, but glomerular protein loss is going to be one of the first
conditions to rule out. If there is no protein in the urine, the focus shifts to other organs but
if there is protein in the urine, it must be quantified and that means there is a urine
protein:creatinine ratio.
Interpretation of the Urine Protein: Creatinine ratio
The urine protein:creatinine ratio compares the amount of protein in the urine to the
amount of creatinine, one of the metabolic wastes filtered by the kidneys. By using this
ratio, it does not matter how dilute the urine is or how concentrated it is. The ratio allows
for protein loss to be quantified and then we can tell how significant the protein loss
actually is. If the urine protein: creatinine ratio is found to be abnormal, ideally it is
repeated in 2 to 4 weeks to be sure that the protein loss is persistent, but this depends on
how high the ratio is and whether or not there is a known inflammatory condition that
would be expected to damage the glomeruli.
Determining how serious a patient's protein loss is depends on overall kidney function as
well. In other words, a protein-losing kidney that is effectively removing the daily load of
toxins and wastes is in less trouble than a protein-losing kidney that is failing.

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 3/7
The International Renal Interest Society (IRIS) considers a urine protein:creatinine ratio of
greater than 0.5 for dogs or 0.4 for cats to be abnormal, and if it is persistent, then further
diagnostics and treatment are recommended.
Depending on how your pet responds to the therapies above, a biopsy may be
recommended. Biopsy is most commonly recommended for patients with UPC ratios more
than 3.5 or with significant proteinuria combined with low albumin levels or high blood
pressure.
The goal of treatment is to reduce the UPC ratio to below 0.5 or to reduce it by at
least 50%. Higher reductions are sought for cats (see later).
Ratios greater than 3.5 are particularly concerning and require more aggressive treatment
and more extensive diagnostics. These patients have an increased risk of abnormal blood
clotting and generally have more extensive kidney damage.
The urine protein: creatinine ratio varies by up to 30% above or below baseline as
a matter of course. A significant change in the ratio caused by disease
progression (up) or response to therapy (down) must be greater than 30%.
If Intervention is Recommended what Does that Mean?
Adding omega 3 fatty acids to the regimen appears to improve the protein loss situation
and supplementation is recommended. Most renal diets are already fortified with these
anti-inflammatory fats but additional use is felt to be beneficial.
Low Protein, Low Sodium Diet
Most commercial renal diets would fit in this category. It seems paradoxical that a disease
that causes body protein to be lost would be treated with a protein-restricted diet but, in
fact, supplementing protein causes albumin to drop faster.
ACE Inhibitor
These medications have been shown to reduce renal protein loss. Typically enalapril is
recommended for dogs and benazepril is recommended for cats. These medications
inherently reduce blood flow to the kidneys so care must be taken in patients with
elevated creatinine ratios to be sure the uremia does not worsen. Lower doses are used
and monitoring becomes more important.
Omega 3 Fatty Acid Supplementation
Most commercial renal diets are fortified with omega 3 fatty acids. These antiinflammatory fats have been shown to improve survival of dogs with renal disease. It is
still unclear how helpful they are for cats but studies are ongoing.
Angiotensin II Receptor Blockers (ARBs)
Angiotensin II receptor blockers are becoming more popular in human medicine and their
use is trickling down to manage canine glomerular disease. These medications work with
ACE inhibitors to further help reduce urinary protein loss though they can also be used
alone. Like the ACE inhibitors, they not only reduce urine protein loss but also lower blood
pressure as well and seem to have some effect on reducing the clotting tendency. They
are new to veterinary medicine and protocols are still being worked out. The two
commonly used medications are losartan and telmisartan.
Spironolactone
Aldosterone is the hormone that acts on the kidney to retain sodium and water and get rid
of potassium. Spironolactone is an antagonist of this hormone, which means it increases
urine production, retains potassium and removes sodium. In humans, it has been found to
reduce urine protein loss by 34 percent, which makes it an attractive medication for this
situation especially in patients with nephrotic syndrome (see below). In dogs it might be
used when ACE inhibitors or ARBs have not controlled the proteinuria. It is not a
medication for cats.

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 4/7
The goal in managing urine protein loss is a 50% reduction in urine
protein:creatinine ratio for dogs and a 90% reduction in urine protein:creatinine
ratio for cats. A combination of the above medications is likely to be prescribed,
and urine and blood test monitoring will be periodically (at least quarterly)
recommended in hope of achieving and finally maintaining these results.
Nephrotic Syndrome
In severe cases, a complication called nephrotic syndrome can result due to the extreme
urinary protein loss. Nephrotic syndrome is defined as the combination of: 1) significant
protein loss in urine; 2) low serum albumin; 3) edema or other abnormal fluid
accumulation; or 4) elevated blood cholesterol level. This is a severe complication of
glomerular disease and suggests a poor prognosis, especially if creatinine levels are
elevated in the blood. High blood pressure is a common complication of nephrotic
syndrome. Patients also tend to form inappropriate blood clots (embolism) that can lodge
in small blood vessels, causing loss of circulation to entire organs or sections of organs.
Nephrotic syndrome is an advanced state of urinary protein loss and must be treated
aggressively.
Biopsy the Kidney?
There are pros and cons to this relatively invasive test. The kidney receives 25 percent of
the blood supply at any given time, which means it is highly vascularized and can bleed in
an extreme way. Blood transfusion is needed for 10 percent of dogs and 17 percent of
cats having this procedure, and a three percent mortality rate has been reported. So why
take the chance on this procedure? The main reason is to obtain information on
prognosis. There are different types of glomerular disease and glomerular inflammation,
all of which may have different associated expectations. There is a type of glomerular
disease called amyloidosis that involves abnormal protein (called amyloid) infiltrating the
kidneys and has a much more progressive and damaging course. Approximately 50
percent of glomerular disease patients have diseases that can benefit from immunesuppressive therapy but the only way to identify these patients is with a biopsy.
Conclusion
When the kidney cannot retain blood proteins, the body loses its ability to carry out normal
blood functions. In an attempt to replace these proteins, muscle is broken down and the
patient becomes debilitated. Maintaining proper nutrition and using medication to reduce
the protein loss are crucial to managing this form of kidney disease. It is important for the
pet owner to keep up the monitoring schedule and to stay in contact with the veterinarian
as to the pet's progress and response to therapy.
In Summary
Glomerular disease is one broad type of kidney disease in which the
primary problem is loss of renal proteinuria. Glomerulonephritis is one
broad classification of kidney inflammation. It usually results in protein loss
in urine. There are subtypes that can be determined by specialist
pathologists based on renal biopsy.
It is not typical Glomerular disease differs somewhat from “classic” kidney
failure renal disease, although it glomerular disease can lead to chronic
kidney disease if undetected.
In the kidney, there are a million nephrons that make urine every minute of
the day and send that urine to the bladder and out of the body through a
filtration system. A body only needs approximately 30% of those nephrons
working correctly for normal kidney function, at least as far as veterinarians

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 5/7
could detect with typical lab tests. The rest are a backup system called the
functional reserve.
Inflammatory cells punch small holes along the filtration route. Those holes
are big enough for proteins to pass through.
Sources of chronic inflammation are believed to cause the problem,
possibly stemming from issues such as chronic ear or skin infections,
dental disease, heartworm disease, vector-borne diseases like Lyme
disease, or feline immunodeficiency.
Diagnosis is suspected by excess urine protein found in urine, and/or low
albumin found on a blood test. Definitive diagnosis of glomerulonephritis
and its specific type requires a kidney biopsy.
When the kidney cannot retain blood proteins, the body cannot carry out
normal blood functions. In an attempt to replace these proteins, muscle is
broken down and the patient becomes debilitated.
The urine protein:creatinine ratio (UPC) found in a urine test compares the
amount of protein in the urine to the amount of creatinine, a metabolic
waste filtered by the kidneys. The ratio tells what the magnitude of the
protein loss actually is. A persisting, reproducible urine protein:creatinine
ratio of greater than 0.5 for dogs or 0.4 for cats is too high. Mild elevations
can be due to causes other than glomerulonephritis.
Determining how serious the protein loss also depends on overall kidney
function. A protein-losing kidney that is still effectively removing the daily
load of toxins and wastes is in less trouble than one that is failing. Once the
urine protein:creatinine reaches a certain ratio, a biopsy may be
recommended. Ratios greater than 3.5 (typical US units) are particularly
concerning.
The best treatment is when a specific cause is found, such as a systemic
infectious disease, and that disease can be successfully treated. However,
sometimes despite extensive searching with imaging and blood tests, no
underlying cause can be found.
One goal is to reduce the urine protein:creatinine ratio to below 0.5 or to
reduce it by at least 50% in dogs and 90% in cats.
Potential interventions expected to help specifically with proteinuria include:
omega-3 fatty acid supplementation; a controlled protein, low sodium diet;
and RAAS inhibition (with drugs called ARBs or ACEIs). Accompanying
hypertension, when present, may require additional treatment.
In severe cases, a complication called nephrotic syndrome can result due
to extreme urinary protein loss. The prognosis for this complication is
comparatively poor, although it does depend on whether the problem
developed acutely or chronically.
A kidney biopsy can be informative about a prognosis and suggest whether
additional treatments are expected to help. Since immunosuppressive
treatments can also do harm, biopsy is usually recommended to justify
trying that type of medication. Biopsy can be expensive and requires preplanning to make it safe. For sample evaluation to be truly valuable, the
specimens are analyzed by a specialist veterinary nephropathologist.
It is important for you to keep up the monitoring schedule and stay in
contact with your veterinarian. Back to top

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 6/7
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951842&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288177
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951842&ind=505&objTypeID=1007 7/7

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Dialysis catheter placed in a dog's jugular vein.
Image Courtesy of ACCESS Specialty Animal
Hospitals
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet?
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: August 24, 2023
Published: October 25, 2004
The kidney is a tremendous organizer of
our small ions. It determines how much
calcium to keep and how much to dump.
It controls our blood's pH by controlling
which acids and bases to keep and which
to lose. It controls sodium, potassium,
carbon dioxide, water balance, and more.
The kidney filters unwanted toxic
biochemicals and gets rid of them using a
process called excretion. Not only are
toxins removed, but they are removed
using just the right amount of water so
that hydration is maintained. In failure,
however, everything goes haywire. The
wrong things are dumped, the wrong
things are kept, toxins build up and the
patient is sick. The state of toxicity that
results is called uremia or uremic
poisoning.
Almost every animal hospital can provide diuresis, therapy in which extra fluid beyond
what the patient can drink is provided, thus giving the kidney a boost to remove toxic
waste. This works well in a large number of patients but there comes a time when, even
with plenty of fluids, the sick kidney simply cannot get the toxins out. For most patients,
this is the end of the line. In fact, however, dialysis may be another choice. It must be
understood that dialysis is substantially more expensive than diuresis, and centers that
provide dialysis for pets are still few and far between.
What Is Dialysis?
Dialysis is a process that can be thought of as
cleansing the blood of toxins. This is done using a
membrane called a dialyzer membrane and a fluid
called dialysate. The blood is separated from the
dialysate by the dialyzer membrane. The dialysate
fluid is formulated so that the toxins in the blood
will be attracted across the dialyzer membrane and
into the dialysate fluid.
There are two types of dialysis: peritoneal dialysis
and hemodialysis. When most people refer to
someone needing dialysis, they mean
hemodialysis. The patient is hooked up to the
dialysis machine by an intravenous catheter and a

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952107&ind=506&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Image Courtesy of ACCESS Specialty Animal
pump forces the patient's blood into the machine for cleansing. The detoxified blood is
returned to the patient. Peritoneal dialysis is less high-tech and uses the patient's own
abdomen as the dialyzer membrane. The belly is filled with dialysate fluid, toxins are
attracted into the fluid over several hours and the fluid (with its toxins) is drained from the
belly at the end of the procedure.
Hemodialysis (Description and FAQ)
The intravenous catheters used in
hemodialysis are very large and very long so
as to support the appropriate speed of blood
flow through the dialyzer.
The catheters are difficult to place so
surgery may be necessary to do so. A longterm IV port under the skin may be needed if
treatments are to be ongoing. A single
catheter may be in place for months.
The treatment lasts three to five hours,
sometimes longer, during which the patient
must calmly sit on a table attached to the
equipment. Treatments typically are
performed three times a week either indefinitely (as in chronic renal failure) or until the
kidney has healed (as in acute renal failure).
There are numerous conditions that will benefit from this type of blood cleansing besides
kidney failure. Electrolyte imbalances, heart failure, and many poisonings can also be
treated with hemodialysis.
Why Is This So Long in Coming to Pets?
Part of the problem has been that dialysis machines are generally designed for human
patients. The amount of blood that goes through the human dialysis machine is too large a
blood loss for a veterinary patient to withstand so smaller machines had to be built. A
veterinary dialysis machine had to be designed for patients as small as a 5 or 6-pound
cat. Furthermore, a dialysis center requires specifically trained staff and 24-hour staffing. It
was and is difficult to get such facilities financed. The procedure is still expensive and
requires a dedicated owner but at least it is now an option.
How Often Is Dialysis Performed on a Patient?
The patient who depends on dialysis to relieve the symptoms of uremia must have dialysis
three times a week on average. The pet owner must be able to bring the pet to the dialysis
center with this frequency and leave the pet for the several hours needed. Kidney
transplant patients, of course, only require dialysis until they are well enough for surgery.
Patients with a stone obstructing a ureter (the tube connecting the kidney and bladder) will
require dialysis until they are stable for surgery. Patients who have lost kidney function
acutely from poisoning, usually antifreeze, or infection (usually leptospirosis) typically
require a month of therapy while their kidneys heal. Other patients may require therapy
indefinitely.
Does Dialysis Reliably Control Uremic Poisoning?
Not all patients respond to dialysis. How a given patient will do in part depends on what
caused the kidney failure in the first place (toxin vs. infection vs. metabolic causes).
Out of 138 dogs who failed to respond to conventional therapy for kidney failure —
diuresis — at the University of California, 40% responded to dialysis. Infectious causes
(generally leptospirosis) tend to have a better prognosis. As leptospirosis has re-emerged

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952107&ind=506&objTypeID=1007 2/5
as a common cause of canine acute kidney failure, the overall response rate for dogs
receiving dialysis has improved to 50%.
In a study in 2003 of cats requiring hemodialysis, the response rate was 56%; the best
prognosis was for those with a ureter obstruction where over 70% survived.
At What Point in Treatment Is Dialysis Recommended?
If dialysis is being considered, it is best not to wait until conventional therapy has
completely failed and the pet is on death's door. Let your veterinarian know from the start
that this is an option you are interested in so that your veterinarian can consult with the
dialysis center on the best time to refer.
What Are the Complications and Disadvantages?
A new world of complications (beyond those of conventionally managed kidney patients) is
introduced to the kidney patient on dialysis.
Malnutrition and Nausea
The toxin build-up in kidney failure causes nausea, and appetite loss follows. Toxins
further cause ulcers in the stomach and intestine that contribute even more to the loss of
appetite. Once the toxins are removed, the intestine heals quickly but appetite loss may
persist. Making the nutrition issue worse is the fact that dialysis patients have an
increased protein requirement and an increased calorie requirement. It is particularly
important for the dialysis patient to get nutrients in one way or another. Feeding tubes or
IV feeding may be necessary.
Metabolic Bone Disease
When the sick kidney does not properly get rid of phosphorus, calcium is mobilized in a
complicated hormonal reaction. Dialysis patients appear to be at higher risk for broken
bones than are conventionally-managed kidney patients.
Carnitine Deficiency
Carnitine is a nutrient that facilitates the transport of the body's energy sources.
Unfortunately, dialysis inherently depletes the patient of carnitine. Carnitine deficiency
results in heart disease, low red blood cell count, and muscle weakness. Supplementation
is often necessary for dialysis patients if dialysis is going to be regularly performed for
periods longer than one month.
Taurine Deficiency
Taurine is an amino acid of animal protein origin. As is the case with carnitine, taurine is
lost in the process of dialysis. Taurine deficiency can result in heart disease and (in cats)
blindness if it is allowed to persist. This amino acid must be supplemented for long-term
dialysis patients.
Problems with the Dialysis Catheter
The dialysis catheter may create a blood clot at the catheter tip. This can interfere with the
high blood flow rates necessary for proper dialysis. When a clot occurs, a forceful flushing
of the catheter may be enough to move it. If not, clot-dissolving medications must be used
and this becomes expensive and may lead to inability to clot.
Infection from the Dialysis Catheter
An infected dialysis catheter is bad news. The resulting blood infection can be lethal and,
at best, requires months of antibiotic therapy. Be aware of reddening skin or pus at the
catheter site. A fever is of great concern so become familiar with taking the pet's
temperature.
Continual Renal Replacement Therapy

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952107&ind=506&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Continual renal replacement therapy (CRRT) is another form of blood filtration similar to
dialysis; in fact, which procedure is the best choice for the human patient is hotly debated
in human medicine. While dialysis removes toxins built up over the previous couple of
days over a 3 to 5-hour treatment period, CRRT involves continual removal over a 24 to
48-hour period that mimics the patient's natural kidney function more closely. The idea
here is to continually remove toxins until they are all gone if that is possible. Sometimes, a
couple of treatments are needed. Unlike dialysis, CRRT is not a regularly performed
procedure.
The catheters are similar to the dialysis catheters, but because the procedure requires
being hooked to the equipment for up to two days, sedation is generally required for this
entire period, although this depends on the hospital.
Lower blood flow rates are used in CRRT when compared to hemodialysis, which makes
for fewer blood pressure issues. Also, the dialysis complications that are seen over time
(carnitine deficiency, high dietary calorie requirement, catheter infection, and most of the
other issues listed above) are not problems with CRRT because CRRT is a one-time
treatment. Sedation may be necessary for CRRT, depending on the facility.
Blood cleansing therapies such as these are still new to the veterinary field because their
use is high maintenance and costly. As pet insurance becomes more popular, expense
becomes less of a deterrent, so more facilities are likely to open up. At the present time,
dialysis is chiefly used on a temporary basis for acute conditions, but as treatment
becomes more available and affordable, more chronic patients are likely to come forward.
If dialysis is something you want to consider, let your veterinarian know so that you can be
directed to the appropriate specialist. Costs vary and will depend on your pet's health
status, the number of treatments necessary, and the facility.
Your veterinarian can refer you to the closest facility, and The American Society of
Veterinary Nephrology and Urology (specializing in the kidneys and the larger urinary
system) offers a list of facilities in North America. We hope to add more centers as they
open. If you are aware of an animal dialysis center not listed here, please contact us so it
can be included.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952107&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288207

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952107&ind=506&objTypeID=1007 4/5
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:46 AM Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952107&ind=506&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Additional Resources
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and
Cats: Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 10, 2024
Published: August 20, 2007
The following are other websites that
deserve recognition and that we feel may
be helpful to pet owners seeking further
information.
International Renal Interest Society
Treatment and monitoring guidelines for
veterinarians.
Weird Stuff We Make 
A detailed site with photos on giving
subcutaneous fluids to cats.
Morris Animal Foundation
Episode 17: Chronic Kidney Disease in
Cats
Cornell's Cat Owner's Guide to Kidney
Disease
We highly recommend joining a
newsgroup or listserv, as there is a great deal of information and support to be gleaned
from others who have been there.
Canine CRF Support Group
to join the canine group
Financial Assistance
There are some financial assistance sites to apply for or donate to financial aid for
veterinary care.
Care Credit
A credit card program for medical expenses.
VetBilling
A payment plan program for veterinary bills.
Scratch Pay
A payment plan program for veterinary bills.
Humane Society Are you having trouble affording your pet?
Good luck with your pet!
Related resources

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952679&ind=507&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952679&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288234
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952679&ind=507&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 19, 2024
Published: December 23, 2002
Kidney transplants are something
everyone has heard of for people, but
may not have considered possible for
pets. In fact, while transplants are
confined to specialized facilities with
experienced surgeons, successful kidney
transplants in cats have been going on
since the mid-1980s. Canine programs
have been less successful but are also
available in limited facilities.
To the uninitiated, the impression may be
that once someone receives a new
kidney, life is renewed and all the kidney
problems are solved. In fact, this is hardly
the case. There are immune-suppressive
medications needed to prevent the new
organ from being rejected, not to mention
potential for infection, on-going screening
tests, and other issues. A kidney transplant is
a very big deal regardless of the species, and
not every patient is even a candidate, so let's
walk through the main considerations.
Where Do the Donors Come from and What
Happens to Them Afterward?
This question is important ethically for
everyone involved in the transplantation
program. No one wishes to harm the donor
animal who cannot voluntarily become an
organ donor in the way a human can, nor is
there a mechanism to harvest organs from
comatose brain-damaged patients as might be done for humans.
Feline kidney donors usually come from research facilities. These cats are classified as
“specific pathogen-free,” which means they are free from infectious diseases. They are
matched by blood typing and potentially by tissue typing, depending on the transplant
program. A research cat is selected, and a kidney is removed for the recipient. After the
procedure, the owner of the recipient cat must adopt the donor.
Some transplantation programs allow the owner of the recipient cat to provide the donor.
Donors must be young adults, generally at least 10 pounds in size, be free of infectious
diseases such as feline immunodeficiency virus, feline leukemia virus, and toxoplasmosis,

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951840&ind=508&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Ollie and Mr. Moto now live together after one cat's kidney was
transplanted into the other. Photo courtesy of Dr. Lillian Aronson.
and must have excellent kidney function. Basic blood testing and urine cultures must be
normal.
You enter the program with one cat
and leave with two cats.
For dogs, the recipient's owner is
generally responsible for finding the
donor. The University of California
transplant program has been on hold
since 2007, but as an example, its
former donor guidelines were that the
donor must be less than six years of
age, of similar size as the recipient
(and preferably of the same breed),
and tissue matching is needed if the
donor is not related to the recipient.
Is Your Cat a Candidate?
Kidney transplantation is not a
procedure that is left until all medical
therapies have been exhausted. The
best candidate is free from other medical problems besides kidney disease. Typical
screening includes:
Basic blood panel (including thyroid level) and urinalysis
Urine culture (elimination of latent infection is crucial, and often a trial of
immune-suppressive drugs is used after an infection has been cleared to
ensure that the infection does not come back)
Feline leukemia virus and feline immunodeficiency virus screening
Ultrasound examination of the heart (heart diseases that involve high blood
pressure development can damage the new kidney)
Screening for toxoplasmosis (the immune suppressive drugs needed to
maintain the new kidney could reactivate a latent infection with this parasite). A
positive test for Toxoplasma does not preclude the transplant but a positive
donor must be selected. Recipient cats testing positive for Toxoplasma are
generally kept on clindamycin for life. Recipient cats testing negative will be
periodically screened for Toxoplasma for the rest of their lives.
Blood typing
Blood pressure monitoring
Urine protein to creatinine ratio to evaluate glomerular disease/renal protein
loss.
Teeth cleaning (performed under anesthesia)

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951840&ind=508&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Different programs may have additional required screening tests such as kidney biopsy,
intestinal biopsy to rule out inflammatory bowel disease, test doses of immunesuppressive medications, etc. Obviously the details would be provided by the specific
program being considered.
If the cause of the kidney failure is felt to be something that would lead the new kidney to
fail as well, this may disqualify the patient from the program. Such conditions would
include renal lymphoma or other cancer, amyloidosis (a malignant protein deposition), and
pyelonephritis (a deep kidney infection, although if the infection is truly felt to have been
eliminated, the patient might still qualify). Again, each program will indicate what
conditions might serve to automatically disqualify a recipient.
An additional problem for dogs worth mentioning is intestinal intussusception. Imagine a
telescope. Unfolded, it is basically a cylinder, but folded, and one segment collapses
inside an outer segment. Now, imagine this happening to a piece of the intestine. A lifethreatening obstruction results. A procedure called enteroplication is given in conjunction
with the transplant. In this procedure, the intestines are tacked down with sutures into a
formation that precludes any telescoping motions. This procedure, along with proper pain
medication post-surgically, seems to prevent intussusception.
Cats with relatively early kidney failure are not yet candidates for transplantation. Cats
with advanced kidney failure are not good candidates either, although dialysis (available at
advanced critical care facilities such as those that perform kidney transplants) may
improve the values.
The best candidates are those with an acute cause of kidney failure (such as a poisoning),
cats who do not respond well to the usual medical management, or cats with a creatinine
greater than 4.0 mg/dl. The cat should have a decent appetite and be as strong as
possible prior to this major surgery. Again, each transplant center will have its own
criteria.
Prior to surgery, the recipient cat should be made as stable as possible. Usually,
a blood transfusion is needed to correct the renal failure-associated anemia.
Sometimes dialysis is also needed.
Is your Dog a Candidate?
Recipient screening is similar to that for the feline patient though heartworm testing is
needed. Blood clotting tests are also needed for dogs. Similar conditions will also rule a
patient out as a candidate (no cancer, heart disease, amyloidosis, or inflammatory bowel
disease.) The adrenal hormone excess known as Cushing's disease also precludes getting
a kidney transplant. Kidney transplants for dogs are generally not as successful as for
cats, so be sure you understand what you are getting into and the likelihood of obtaining
the outcome you are hoping for.
What Kind of Home Care Will the Recipient Require?
The recipient is going to require suppression of his immune system for the rest of his life.
This not only requires a substantial financial commitment for the medication but also the
ability to give the cat oral medication at least twice a day for the rest of his life. The heart
of this therapy is a medication called cyclosporine, a medication that has revolutionized
organ transplantation for humans. Prednisolone, a commonly used cortisone derivative, is
typically used as well, at least to start.
Cyclosporine is typically given twice a day with the lowest blood level of the day being
approximately 500 ng/ml around the time of surgery and lowering to 250 ng/ml after a
month or so of recovery after surgery. (Rejection of the new kidney occurs when levels dip
below 200 ng/ml.)
Cyclosporine has some disadvantages that include:

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951840&ind=508&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Expense
Cyclosporine is expensive. Concurrent administration of ketoconazole, a
medication normally used to treat fungal infection, has the added benefit of
“potentiating” cyclosporine. This means that less cyclosporine is needed to
achieve the desired effect. As long as ketoconazole is well tolerated, it may
become possible to dose the patient only once a day rather than twice.
Approximately 30% of transplant patients will not be able to utilize this protocol
due to the development of excessive cyclosporine levels or liver enzyme
elevations from the ketoconazole.
Expenses for Monitoring
Periodic blood level monitoring is needed to check that the right dosage is
being used. For most drugs, "what you swallow is what your body gets." For
other drugs, there are individual variations in how the medication is absorbed,
and cyclosporine is one. When two patients take the same amount of
cyclosporine, they may not achieve the same serum levels; some individual
fine-tuning is needed.
Long-term use of cyclosporine increases the risk for the development of
cancer, specifically lymphoma. At the University of Wisconsin Renal Transplant
Center, a 14% incidence of malignant tumor development is reported for cats
with post-transplant time (and thus cyclosporine use time) of greater than one
year.
In dogs, the chemotherapy agent azathioprine is also regularly used for its immunosuppressive properties. It’s usually given every other day long term. Medication costs for
dogs can vary from $150 per month to $2000 per month depending on the dog’s size.
What are Potential Complications for the Recipient?
Infection from immune-suppressive therapy is the second most common cause
of transplant-associated death (rejection being the first). In cats, Toxoplasma
infection is of particular concern, and while preoperative testing may have already
been negative, some cats turn positive after the immune suppression begins. Also,
in cats, old viral upper respiratory infections can be expected to recur, and they can
be severe. In dogs, life-threatening infections can emerge in any organ system.
Stricture (narrow scarring) of the ureter, which is the tiny tube that carries urine from
the new kidney to the urinary bladder. If this occurs, another surgery is needed to
trim the scarred area and re-attach the ureter to the urinary bladder. The original
kidneys are generally not removed unless there is a reason to do so. The new
kidney is simply an extra one. There is an approximately 21% incidence of this
complication in the first 62 days post-operatively in cats. Mostly, males are affected.
The risk for developing diabetes mellitus increases by approximately five times after
a kidney transplant.
What Kind of Survival Time Can You Expect?
In a recent study of feline kidney transplants, 59% of renal transplant patients were still
alive 6 months after surgery and 41% were still alive 3 years afterwards. Apparently the
first 6 months is a somewhat crucial time in determining long-term survival.
The University of Wisconsin Renal Transplant Center reports 70% survival at 6 months for
cats and 50% survival at 3 years. Of the cats that survived to be discharged from the
hospital (i.e. they did not succumb to problems directly related to the surgery), 96%

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951840&ind=508&objTypeID=1007 4/5
survived to 6 months.
The picture is not nearly as bright in dogs. The University of California at Davis program
had a success rate of about 40%.
Kidney transplantation is an expensive undertaking. The University of California at Davis
program, for example, required a deposit of $11,000 for cats and $13,000 for dogs.
Transplantation involves the adoption of a donor and long-term medication and blood
testing for the recipient. If this is something you are seriously considering, be sure to
discuss the procedure with the transplant center closest to you as well as with your
regular veterinarian.
This article reviews some of the information above but also includes a list of kidney
transplant programs around the country.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - July 19, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4951840&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288256
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:47 AM Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4951840&ind=508&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Graphic by MarVista Vet
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: June 19, 2023
Published: November 29, 2009
Lithotripsy is a funny word for a minimally invasive
alternative to urinary stone removal surgery. "Lith"
means stone and "tripsis" means crushing so, in
short, lithotripsy refers to breaking stones into
fragments small enough to pass. No cutting is
involved.
There are two types of lithotripsy: intracorporeal
laser lithotripsy and extracorporeal shock wave
lithotripsy. The gadget that breaks the stone or
stones up is called a lithotriptor (also spelled
lithotripter).
Intracorporeal Laser Lithotripsy (Much More
Commonly Used)
With this technique, stones can be removed from
the lower urinary tract (bladder and urethra). A
specific type of laser called a holmium: YAG laser,
is used to break up the stone, and endoscopy is
needed to get the laser right up to the stone
where the patient's tissues are not in the way.
The endoscope that is used in the urinary tract is
called a cystoscope and must penetrate the
narrow urethral opening of a small animal. Some animals are simply too small for the
procedure. Once the cystoscope is in position, the laser uses heat to create water vapor
bubbles that rapidly expand and collapse. If these bubbles are in contact with the stone,
the crystal structure of the stone is disrupted and the stone breaks apart. The fragments
are either allowed to pass, are removed via the cystoscope's collection basket, or are
expressed from the bladder manually (voiding urohydropropulsion).
If the stones are in the urethra, disruption of the stone is easiest. If the stones are in the
urinary bladder, matters become more complicated. Issues that prevent success include
the diameter of the urethra, blood/bleeding obscuring the view of the stone or hampering
the laser’s contact with the stone, accidental damage to the bladder from the laser, and
prolonged anesthesia time because it is taking so long to fragment the stone(s). Despite
these potential problems, studies have reported 83-96% success (i.e. complete stone
removal) in female dogs and 68-81% success in male dogs.
Advantages of Intracorporeal Laser Lithotripsy vs. Surgical Stone Removal
Patients discharged sooner (often on the same day as the procedure)
Less invasive. No cutting is required.

8/4/25, 11:48 AM Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952898&ind=509&objTypeID=1007 1/3
Photo by ACCESS Specialty Animal Hospitals
Studies have shown that 100 percent of
stones in the urethra can be removed
with intracorporeal laser lithotripsy and
the median time to complete the
procedure was only 36 minutes. This is
vastly superior to urethral surgery,
which has much more potential for
complications.
Specific equipment is required, and its
availability is limited to specialty
hospitals.
Procedure generally takes longer than
surgery when stones in the urinary
bladder are concerned. The same
depth of anesthesia is required as with
surgery.
Generally more expensive than surgery.
Not an option for male cats or small male dogs.
If numerous stones are present, lithotripsy is not efficient and surgery should be
performed instead. Some facilities recommend against lithotripsy if the pet has
more than five stones.
If the stones are large it may not be time-efficient to use lithotripsy (some
facilities recommend against lithotripsy if there is more than one stone of a half
inch or more in diameter).
Because lithotripsy can wash an infection backward and up into the kidneys, a
culture of the urine should be performed prior to the procedure. Infection also
leads to some urethral swelling, which makes the introduction of the
cystoscope more difficult. Any infections should be controlled as best as
possible prior to the procedure.
Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy
This form of lithotripsy is used to fragment stones in the upper urinary tract: the kidney
and ureter. To break up the stone, the patient is anesthetized and a shock wave is focused
on the stone. The shock wave must propagate in water so the patient is either partially
submerged in a water tank or a “water cushion” is applied to the patient. Commonly over a
thousand shocks are delivered to the patient. Certain types of stones are more amenable
to this form of fragmentation (calcium oxalate stones are especially amenable in dogs but
not in cats, while urate stones, as another example, are not amenable to this form of
lithotripsy at all). Stones in the kidney (versus those in the ureter) are more easily
fragmented.
Extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy can be used for stones in the urinary bladder but
this is more difficult as the stones tend to move around in the bladder and it becomes
difficult to focus the shock waves.
Advantages of Extracorporeal Shock Wave Lithotripsy vs. Surgical Stone Removal
Cutting into the kidney virtually always reduces kidney function afterward.
Kidney function is better preserved with lithotripsy.
Less invasive to the patient.
The procedure is successful in 85% of dogs.
Disadvantages

8/4/25, 11:48 AM Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952898&ind=509&objTypeID=1007 2/3
Specific equipment is required and availability is limited to specialty practices
and universities.
Approximately 10% of cases where lithotripsy was used to fragment a kidney
stone ended up with a stone fragment obstructing a ureter. This requires some
additional treatment (another lithotripsy, surgery, medical management, etc.)
Approximately 2 to 3% of cases will develop pancreatitis from the shock waves.
In order to submit stone fragments for analysis, they must be collected or found
after they are passed by the patient.
It can take several months to pass all the stone fragments.
30% of dogs are likely to require a second procedure to complete the
fragmentation of kidney stones. For stones in the ureter, 50% of dogs require
more than one procedure.
Reserved for kidney stones 1.5 cm (0.6 inches) in diameter or smaller. Stones
larger than this in the kidney will require endoscopic placement of a stent in the
urethra so that there will be room to pass the fragments.
If you are interested in this procedure as an alternative to surgery, talk with your
veterinarian to find out if there is a specialist facility near you that is equipped for
lithotripsy.
Related resources
Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - January 6, 2025
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats - September 28, 2024
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Cats - December 25, 2023
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - October 5, 2023
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - June 1, 2022
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952898&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288280
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:48 AM Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952898&ind=509&objTypeID=1007 3/3

Photo Courtesy Adobe/Shutterstock
Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats
Carol Hershey, DVM
Published: September 01, 2022
Polyuria and polydipsia are essentially flip sides of
the same condition. With polyuria (PU) the body
makes more urine than normal, which in turn
causes a condition called polydipsia (PD), which
means your dog or cat is extra thirsty because they
are trying to stay hydrated. What goes out must be
replaced by what goes in. But it is equally true that
what goes in must go out as well, although
sometimes water taken in goes out through panting,
especially in dogs.
How much water your pet regularly drinks can vary
from day to day, but when a pattern of more than
usual intake and outtake occurs, PU/PD is a possible, if not likely, cause. Finding out the
cause involves your veterinarian looking at your pet’s patterns and running some tests.
How Does PU/PD Happen?
It takes many body systems to control water intake and urine production. These systems
include the thirst center, kidneys, pituitary gland, and hypothalamus, an area in the front of
the brain. Changes in the volume of blood – which is mostly water - flowing through the
body will also increase or decrease thirst.
Lack of water is not the only cause of PU/PD. Low blood pressure (hypotension), fever,
pain, and certain medications can also cause your pet to be extra thirsty. These conditions
cause the release of anti-diuretic hormones (ADH) from a small gland in the brain called
the pituitary. ADH is important in keeping you and your pet hydrated. ADH binds to
receptors in the kidneys to keep water in the body. When all is normal, the binding helps
blood volume and blood pressure stay normal. If the kidneys are diseased or damaged,
they will lose too much fluid. For example, if blood volume and pressure are too low, ADH
is released, and the kidneys make less urine. If the blood pressure is normal, the pituitary
does not release ADH.
Causes
Finding the cause for PU/PD is sometimes straightforward and other times quite difficult.
Decreased release of ADH, a kidney’s failure to respond to ADH, or changes in the
kidneys can cause PU/PD. The kidneys will release more water (urine), which will cause
thirst, and your dog or cat will drink more.
Several conditions can produce this problem in dogs and cats. The most common causes
in dogs are chronic kidney disease, hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s disease), and
diabetes mellitus. In cats, the most common causes also include chronic kidney
disease and diabetes mellitus, but also hyperthyroidism. There are, however, other
possible causes.

8/4/25, 11:48 AM Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=11111095&ind=510&objTypeID=1007 1/2
Photo Courtesy VIN/Bigstock Images
Drugs that can cause PU/PD include glucocorticoids, phenobarbital, and diuretics. Salt
can be a contributor.
Diagnosis
To diagnose PU/PD, your veterinarian will start with
a thorough physical examination, take your pet’s
history, and likely run some laboratory tests,
including a complete blood count, serum
biochemistry panel, urinalysis, and urine culture.
The background you supply in your pet’s history
may help your veterinarian track down the cause of
the PU/PD.
Testing the pet’s urine helps show if the kidneys are
working properly. Kidneys concentrate urine by
keeping water in the body. Veterinarians will
measure this urine concentration, which is called
specific gravity. This measurement may show what is causing the PU/PD. Urine
concentration, also called USG, is a substitute test for urine volume. Measuring daily urine
output is hard in pets, whereas measuring their USG is easy. High volumes of urine are
seen when the animal has a low urine concentration.
Other blood tests that can help pinpoint the causes of PU/PD include measuring bile acids
before and after eating, tests for Addison’s or Cushing’s disease, thyroid, and blood sugar
(glucose) levels in the body, as well as testing for infectious diseases, such as
Leptospirosis.
If your veterinarian suspects a rare disease called diabetes insipidus, which causes the
body to make too much urine, other tests will be needed. Diabetes insipidus is not related
to diabetes mellitus, which is only a problem with blood sugar.
Ultrasound and X-rays are helpful when looking for cancer, pyometra, or abnormalities in
the adrenal glands.
PU/PD can have many causes. The most common ones are fairly simple to diagnose but
be prepared for a more extensive workup if the typical causes are not found. Luckily,
many of the causes can be successfully managed.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=11111095&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288304
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:48 AM Polyuria/Polydipsia in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=11111095&ind=510&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Graphic by MarVistaVet
Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats
Becky Lundgren, DVM
Revised: March 03, 2020
Published: November 14, 2005
Also known as pyelitis or upper urinary tract
infection, pyelonephritis is an inflammation of the
kidney, specifically of the parenchyma and renal
pelvis.
Pyelonephritis is a common condition that
frequently shows no symptoms, so it is usually not
recognized until the signs become severe. It may
not be diagnosed until tests are done on the kidney
after the pet's death. The frequency of
pyelonephritis increases with age.
It is caused by a bacterial invasion. The organisms
invading the kidney may cause local or widespread
lesions that destroy enough kidney tissue so as to
cause kidney failure.
The kidney infection may come from the bladder
through the ureters, through the bloodstream, or
have invaded through other organs. Infection via
the bladder/ureters is the most common route. The
bloodstream route of infection may be caused by
bacterial endocarditis, diskospondylitis, abscesses,
and dental disease. Urinary stasis, urethral obstruction, kidney stones, trauma, and
depressed immunity may predispose the pet to pyelonephritis.
Diagnosis
Diagnostic tests include blood work, urinalysis, urine sedimentation, X-rays and
ultrasound of the kidney, urine culture, and other specific kidney tests.
Treatment
Treatment requires long-term antibiotic therapy. The antibiotics are chosen by sensitivity
testing. It may only be necessary for 4 to 6 weeks, but some pets may need it for the rest
of their lives. Because the disease is so difficult to cure, frequent testing is required to
make certain the treatment is still working.
Monitoring and Prognosis
Urinalysis and urine culture are done 5 to 7 days after antibiotics begun, and done again
one week after finishing them. Urine cultures are also done at 1, 3, and 6 months after
completion to monitor for recurrence or reinfection. The pet's urine specific gravity is
monitored frequently over the course of therapy, especially if the urine concentrating
ability was initially impaired. A decrease in specific gravity after finishing the antibiotics
may indicate a recurrence.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952397&ind=511&objTypeID=1007 1/2
The prognosis for pyelonephritis varies. Overall, it is considered fair to good. Infections
that involve the renal medulla are more difficult to get rid of, so those cases have a poorer
prognosis. Patients with predisposing endocrine disease, persistent urinary abnormalities
(e.g. nephroliths, neoplasia), or progressive renal disease have a worse prognosis.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952397&pid=19239
ea53cb66-78ba-454a-a896-c78e68ccbedd.1754288326
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Pyelonephritis in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952397&ind=511&objTypeID=1007 2/2

Additional Resources
Kidney Failure in Dogs and Cats:
Where to Begin
Fluid Therapy in Pets
Kidney Dialysis: Is it for your Pet?
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs
and Cats
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red
Blood Cells
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats
High Blood Pressure in our Pets
Renal Failure Dietary Therapy
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: July 19, 2023
Published: July 30, 2007
Many aspects of kidney failure require
attention. The goal of renal therapy,
dietary or otherwise, is to prevent or at
least postpone advanced uremia
(poisoning by toxins the kidneys could not
adequately remove) and extend life
expectancy and quality. Diet is an
important part of achieving these goals
and we are lucky to have commercially
available diets made specifically for renal
patients.
The idea behind using diet as therapy for
kidney disease involves making
alterations in the patient's diet to correct
or at least dampen the toxic metabolic
state of kidney failure. A modified diet can
thus be used to correct imbalances and
slow progression of disease while
maintaining a healthy muscle mass and body condition.
In one famous study where 38 dogs in kidney failure were tracked for 2 years, dietary
therapy reduced the risk of dying by 69% over dogs allowed to continue eating regular
dog food.
Another study in dogs showed that beginning the renal diet when the creatinine was
between 2.0 and 3.1 delayed the onset of uremic crisis by 5 months.
A study of 50 cats with stable, naturally occurring renal failure were divided into two
groups, one receiving a renal diet and the other receiving regular food. The cats on the
renal diet survived over twice as long as the others.
There are more studies where these came from showing great survival and life quality
benefit for renal patients who eat renal diets rather than regular maintenance diets.
What Makes a Renal Diet Different?
A renal diet takes into consideration reduction in uremic toxins, control of high blood
pressure, calcium/phosphorus balance, maintenance of proper potassium levels and
reduction in inflammation. Let's review the features of a renal diet and why they are
important:
Phosphorus Restriction

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952670&ind=512&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Photo Courtesy Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
This is an important part of a renal diet since
phosphorus balance is crucial. Phosphorus
comes into the body through the diet and
leaves it through the kidney. The problem is
that when kidney function is poor, not as
much phosphorus is removed as needs to
be.
Obviously using less phosphorus in the diet
may be enough to keep the blood
phosphorus levels normal, thus balancing
the intake with the output, but sometimes
addition of medication (i.e. a phosphate
binder) is needed to further reduce intake.
Restricting dietary phosphate has been shown to slow the progression of renal disease.
If the goal phosphorus level has not been achieved in 4 to 6 weeks after starting
the renal diet, a phosphorus binder should be used.
Potassium Supplementation
In chronic kidney disease, potassium is not conserved properly and becomes depleted.
When potassium depletion becomes excessive, the patient's overall muscle strength,
energy and general life quality are affected. Potassium supplements may be needed in
the form of oral gels or powders but ideally, potassium is supplemented in the easiest
possible way which generally means incorporating more potassium in the diet. If
potassium levels can be maintained simply with food, this would mean less medication for
the patient to have to take.
Omega 3 Fatty Acids
Studies suggest that kidney failure patients taking omega 3 fatty acids are likely to live
longer than patients who do not take them. This has led to the supplementation of most
renal diets with fish oils. The full import of fatty acid supplementation is still being worked
out.
Other dietary features include B vitamin supplementation (since the damaged kidneys
tend to lose excess B complex), which have non-acidifying features to help control
acidosis.
Low Protein?
Since a number of renal toxins come from the break-down and processing of protein, one
way to give the kidneys less work to do is to eat less protein. How much less protein
depends on how serious the kidney disease is as there is a minimum protein requirement
for maintaining body condition and a protein-restricted diet must not be restricted below
that level.
Exactly how to restrict protein involves a lot of choices. Older animals tend to require a
higher dietary protein level in general when compared to their younger counterparts.
Protein also adds palatability to the food so that if we try to restrict protein too much we
may end up with a pet who will not eat at all. Further, plant proteins tend to produce less
difficulty with phosphorus balance but animal origin proteins may be needed for required
amino acids. It is no surprise that decades of research have gone into how protein
selection is accomplished to create an effective but tasty diet.
There is no protective value to restricting protein prior to the onset of kidney
failure. It is not preventive or at all helpful for a healthy senior pet to be
restricted in dietary protein.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952670&ind=512&objTypeID=1007 2/5
High-protein diets do not cause kidney failure (though they certainly make the
patient worse after kidney failure has begun).
Protein restriction is probably the least important dietary modification in early
stages of kidney disease. There are special diets available for patients with less
restrictive needs and others for patients in more advanced states.
At What Point Should a Special Diet be Started?
This question has been controversial for a long time. For many animals, changing diet to a
less palatable food represents a definite reduction in life quality. There was some thinking
that we are changing the diet too soon. On the other hand, if a pet is in a more advanced
state of disease before the switch is made, the pet will be much less willing to change to a
food of less palatability. The companies that make these foods have put a great deal of
research into improving palatability over the years, which has helped tremendously.
Now the International Renal Interest Society finally has guidelines.
The IRIS Guidelines recommend considering a change to a renal diet by IRIS Stage II
(creatinine test between 1.6 mg/ml and 2.8 mg/ml with an SDMA test between 18 & 25 in
cats; creatinine test between 1.4 mg/ml and 2.8 mg/ml with SDMA test of 18 & 35 for
dogs). The diet should have clear benefits at IRIS stage III which is later on, but the
recommendation has been moved to a lower stage because animals in stage III are less
likely to accept diet change. It was deemed that the change should be made earlier to
have a better chance to be in place when it is more crucially needed.
These guidelines allow the patient to benefit the most from the preventive advantages of
the diet. If the pet finds the diet palatable, then there should be no life quality issues with
changing foods.
What if my Pet Will Not Eat the Renal Diet?
Animals with insufficient kidney function frequently do not feel well and will not be inclined
to eat bland food. Here are some tips in increasing acceptance of renal diet.
Is the Pet Feeling Iill?
As mentioned, the pet that feels ill may be disinclined to eat a new food. Consider using
other medical treatments until the pet is feeling better before changing diets.
Consider Feeding Access
If the pet feels ill, he or she may not feel like walking across the house to the feeding area.
Be sure the food is accessible.
Offer a Choice of Renal Diets
At this point, there are many renal diets available in different textures and different flavors.
There are kibbled foods, stews, morsels and gravy, pates, and loaf formats. Commonly a
renal patient will eat one food for a while and then stop accepting it only to accept a new
format, even if it was rejected on a prior location. Your vet can help you get a selection so
that even a picky pet find something acceptable.
Appetite Stimulants/Medications
Medications such as capromorelin, mirtazapine or cyproheptadine can be used to
enhance hunger and encourage eating.
If the pet simply does not respond, it may not be possible to use a renal diet and other
medications may be needed (as reviewed in other areas of our Kidney Failure Center) to
provide therapy.
If the patient is simply too sick to eat at all, assisted feeding may be in order.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952670&ind=512&objTypeID=1007 3/5
Photo Courtesy Dr. Teri Ann Oursler
Home Cooking a Renal Diet
Home cooking an appropriate renal diet is a
complicated task as might be surmised from
the information above. Commercial diets
have decades of research behind them as
well as government regulation and
professional quality control. They are also
convenient to use. That said, some pet
owners prefer to have more control over the
ingredients they feed their pets and want
more involvement with diet choices.
Commercial diets tend to represent a "one
size fits all" approach that may not be best.
For renal patients, it is important not to
simply try to make up your own diet based
on recipes from non-professional sources.
Many recipes float around the internet and
many pet owners may support them but this
is not the same as getting guidance from a
nutrition professional. Your regular
veterinarian can guide you to an appropriate
service for nutritional consultation. or you
may wish to visit the American College of
Veterinary Nutrition.
Related resources
Renal Anemia, or Inadequate Red Blood Cells, in Dogs and Cats - February 16, 2025
Kidney Failure (Chronic) Links for Additional Information - October 10, 2024
High Blood Pressure in Our Pets - September 1, 2024
Kidney Transplants for Cats and Dogs - June 19, 2024
Chronic Kidney Disease in Dogs and Cats: Where to Begin - November 6, 2023
Kidney Dialysis: Is It for Your Pet? - August 24, 2023
Calcium Phosphorus Balance in Dogs and Cats - August 3, 2023
Fluid Therapy in Pets - June 8, 2022
Glomerulonephritis in Dogs and Cats - October 22, 2021
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952670&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288362
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952670&ind=512&objTypeID=1007 4/5
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:49 AM Renal Failure Dietary Therapy - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952670&ind=512&objTypeID=1007 5/5

Uric acid stones. Photo by
MarVistaVet
Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: January 06, 2025
Published: June 06, 2004
The formation of stones made of uric acid (or urates) results from metabolic issues. The
Dalmatian is uniquely predisposed to stone formation because of an equally unique liver
and kidney biochemistry. The gene that causes some Dalmatians to form stones seems to
also be in the English Bulldog, though not nearly to the same extent. Because uric acid
stones are formed in patients with congenital liver shunts, when they are found in breeds
other than Dalmatians or English Bulldogs, they warrant a liver workup.
The Biochemistry of the Uric Acid Stone
It all starts with biochemicals called purines. There are three
types of purines:
Oxypurines - like xanthine, hypoxanthine, uric acid, and
allantoin - words with which the Dalmatian owner
should become familiar
Aminopurines - like adenine and guanine that makeup
DNA
Methylpurines - like caffeine and theophylline, which
are drugs
Humans eat purines when ingesting meat and coffee. The liver
converts them ultimately into something called “allantoin,” one of the oxypurines
mentioned above, which readily dissolves in the body's fluids and is easy for us to unload
in that waste/water mixture known as urine.
Purine to Allantoin Pathway Diagram by MarVista Vet
This system works for just about all mammals except for Dalmatians. Dalmatians are
different.
How Dalmatians Get Rid of Purines

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 1/7
Dalmatian
Dalmatians just cannot seem to convert uric acid to allantoin; the process described
above never gets past the uric acid stage. Dalmatian liver cells simply cannot absorb uric
acid, which is where the conversion to allantoin ought to take place. Dalmatians must
excrete uric acid in their urine without this last conversion, and the problem is that the stuff
just is not very water-soluble. Being unable to convert uric acid to allantoin is the main
predisposing factor for uric acid stone formation and accounts for why 80% of uric acid
bladder stones come from Dalmatians. The other 20% are from other breeds with the
same genetic mutation as stone-forming Dalmatians or patients with impaired liver
function.
Purines to Uric Acid Pathway by MarVista Vet
   
Is This the Same As Gout in Humans?
Not really, but it is similar. Humans with gout have an excess of uric acid in their bodies for
a number of reasons:
Excessive consumption of high-purine foods (alcohol, shellfish, mushrooms,
spinach, etc.)
Certain medications may increase uric acid levels in the bloodstream.
Hereditary factors also exist.
Uric acid crystals form and congeal into kidney stones but classically gout involves the
precipitation of uric acid crystals in the delicate membranes of joints, causing arthritis pain.
Dogs do not get joint uric acid deposits in the same way humans do; for dogs, the urinary
tract is where the action is. As an aside, birds are not able to convert uric acid to allantoin
(the crystalline white material that is eliminated by birds is actually their urine; the greyish
material eliminated with the white is stool). Birds that make excess uric acid will develop
uric acid joint deposits, essentially gout.
Do All Dalmatians Form Uric Acid Stones?
No, only some Dalmatians form stones, and
it is not known what makes one Dalmatian a
stone former and another one clinically
normal, except that those that form stones
circulate extra high levels of uric acid
compared to other Dalmatians. There are
genetic factors, dietary factors, and unknown
factors. Male Dalmatians are reported as
stone formers more often than female
Dalmatians, but this may be a reflection of
the fact that only male dogs have the added
stone complication of urethral obstruction, a
problem female dogs rarely have to worry
about (thus, male dogs may be seeing the veterinarian for their stones more than female
dogs do). Stone-forming Dalmatians seem to be excreting more uric acid than their nonstone-forming counterparts. The average age at which a Dalmatian may first develop

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 2/7
Radiograph of an os penis. Small black dots are tiny uric
acid stones surrounded by urinary dye. These stones are
obstructing urine flow. Photo courtesy of Dr. William Blevins
stones is 4.5 years. The risk of stone formation declines as the dog ages. Overall, it
appears that even though all Dalmatians excrete high amounts of uric acid, less than 10%
of Dalmatians actually form stones.
For non-Dalmatians, a genetic mutation is necessary to form uric acid stones in the
absence of liver disease. We can now genetically test for this mutation, though this is not
helpful for the Dalmatian as it is already known they have the mutation. Learn more
information about this genetic test.
There has been a movement to breed Dalmatians that do not have the problematic
mutation. This project originally involved crossing a Dalmatian with a pointer and then
breeding the progeny with purebred Dalmatians for numerous generations following. The
result is a dog that is over 99% genetically the same as a purebred Dalmatian but without
the uric acid mutation. Until 2011, these dogs were not recognized as Dalmatians by the
American Kennel Club, but happily, now they are.
How Do You Know If Your Dalmatian Has Stones?
Hopefully, this is an issue that will never come up, but the following are signs of irritation in
the lower urinary tract, which would indicate a need to search for stones:
Bloody urine
Straining to urinate
Urinating small amounts frequently
Seeing gritty material in the dog's urine
Uric acid stones may or may not be visible on plain radiographs. Often, ultrasound or
contrast radiography (use of urinary dyes to create a double contrast cystogram) is
needed to see the stones.
Uric acid crystals are abnormal findings in the urine of dogs other than Dalmatians. In the
Dalmatian, because of their unique metabolism, uric acid crystals are normal in any urine
sample and do not indicate whether stones are present or not.
Getting Rid of the Stones
Urinary obstruction is an emergency!
If you have a male dog straining to urinate,
bring him to the veterinarian right away. He
may have stones obstructing his urethra
(the passageway for urine in the male dog
goes through a bone called the os penis,
and stones often catch at this location). If
this has occurred, a urinary catheter must
be used to push the stone back into the
urinary bladder, where it can either be
removed or dissolved.
Stone Removal via Surgery
Surgery is the fastest way to remove
bladder stones but also the most invasive
way and probably most expensive way.
The bladder is surgically opened, and the
stones are removed and sent to the lab for
analysis. (Dalmatians are perfectly capable of forming struvite and oxalate stones as well,
so analysis must be done to determine the type of stones that have formed.) The urinary
tract is flushed to remove all stones, including those hiding in the urethra. The bladder is

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 3/7
closed and tested for leaks. The belly is closed, and the patient generally goes home in a
day or two, depending on their ability to urinate and their appetite. This all sounds simple,
but there are disadvantages.
Surgery is relatively expensive.
Anesthesia is not without risk, though with modern monitoring equipment, risks
have been minimized.
Dalmatians with uric acid stones may have hundreds of small stones and may
also have stones actually embedded in the bladder wall. It may not be possible
to get them all out. (If this happens, the remaining stones may be handled by
dissolution - in other words, dissolving the remaining stones).
The bladder may not heal normally (a rare complication but a possible one),
and leaks in the urinary tract can be life-threatening.
In general, surgery is a low-risk procedure but it is not unusual for a Dalmatian to require
several stone-removing surgeries during his or her lifetime.
Stone Removal via Dissolution
The idea here is to create urine that brings the uric acid of the existing stone back into
solution (essentially dissolving the stones). There are several steps here:
First, any bladder infection must be controlled. An infection will interfere with
creating the desired urine pH and may even create struvite bladder stones. The
urine should be cultured, and if an organism grows, the patient should be on
antibiotics until the urine cultures negative and possibly throughout the entire
duration of the stone dissolution process.
For years, there was one therapeutic diet restrictive enough in purines to be
appropriate for stone dissolution (it should be noted that this diet is not
appropriate for puppies, and if a growing dog has uric acid stones, surgical
removal is probably a better choice). The canned version is felt to be superior
to the kibble as feeding canned food adds water to the diet - and ultimately to
the urine - which helps dilute the uric acid. Another manufacturer now offers a
low-purine diet for uric acid-forming breeds, and it is available as a dry food.
A medication called allopurinol must be given twice a day at a dose appropriate
for dissolving uric acid stones. After the stones have been dissolved, a lower
dose of allopurinol is used for prevention and maintenance. This medication is
important in uric acid stone management. Read more information about
allopurinol on side effects, drug interactions, and general information.
Further alkalinization of urine beyond what occurs with a therapeutic low-purine
diet may or may not be necessary. The goal urine pH is neutral (7.0), and some
owners may wish to obtain urine dipsticks to monitor this at home. Excess
alkalinization may promote the development of oxalate stones, which is not
wanted, and inadequate alkalinization will prevent dissolution. A periodical
urinalysis can check to see if any further steps regarding urine pH control are
needed.
After a month of this protocol, the stones are re-radiographed to compare their size and
number to those on the original radiograph, and urinalysis is performed to assess pH and
look for crystals. (Stones not visible on radiographs must be assessed by ultrasound,
which is generally more costly.) If the stones get smaller, the protocol continues. If they
are gone, the patient switches to prevention. If there are more stones or they are bigger, it
is possible that xanthine stones are being formed (see below), and some small stones or
urine sediment samples should be retrieved by catheter for analysis. It may simply be that
there was cheating on the diet or that the allopurinol dose must be increased.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 4/7
The disadvantages of stone removal by dissolution are:
It can take months to dissolve uric acid bladder stones.
The protocol may not work.
The expense of radiographs (or ultrasound) and urinalysis every month
eventually will be more than the surgery would have been if the stones did not
quickly dissolve.
If the dog is male, the stones may become small enough to obstruct the urethra
(an emergency), which requires a urinary catheter to push the stone back into
the bladder.
The average dog dissolves stones in three to four months.
Allopurinol: The Short Version
Recall the original purine metabolism pathway:
Purine to Allantoin Pathway Diagram by MarVista Vet
It is known that Dalmatians stop at uric acid. Allopurinol is a medication that binds and
shuts down an enzyme called xanthine oxidase; this is the enzyme that takes
hypoxanthine to xanthine and, ultimately, to uric acid. Without xanthine oxidase, purines
are stuck in the Hypoxanthine stage and do not make it to Uric Acid. It is important to
remember that the inhibition of xanthine oxidase means an increase in xanthine and
hypoxanthine. It can actually mean the formation of xanthine stones, especially if there is
cheating on the diet.
The combination of cheating on the diet and using allopurinol is likely to lead to
xanthine bladder stones!
If you know there will be cheating on the diet, it is probably best not to use allopurinol.
Allopurinol is dangerous in animals with poor kidney function.
Now that the Stones are Gone: Prevention and Monitoring
The diet of the stone-forming dog is the most
important factor in preventing future episodes
of stones. The goal is to feed a diet low in
purines and create alkaline urine (which is
best to keep uric acid dissolved safely in
solution). This is done by feeding a low salt,
low purine diet; again, discuss with your
veterinarian which is best for your pet.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 5/7
The following foods are considered virtually Uric Acid Stones
purine-free and can be used as treats for
stone-forming dogs:
Whole-grain cereals (as long as they do not contain yeast)
Butter
Cheese
Eggs
Fruits
Milk
Allopurinol is generally required for prevention but at a lower dose than required to
dissolve existing stones. Be sure to familiarize yourself with this medication, as dietary
cheating commonly leads to the formation of xanthine stones.
Several protocols have been advocated for periodic monitoring to ensure that no new
stones are likely to form.
A urinalysis should be done one month after instituting prevention and every
three to six months thereafter. Imaging with ultrasound or radiographs with
contrast dye should be considered every six months or more often if there are
recurring urinary symptoms. It is important to detect new stones while they are
still small enough to pass. If stones are small, they can be flushed from the
bladder without surgery. This is a very complete method but all that
ultrasound/contrast radiography may be expensive.
The 24-hour uric acid production test involves collecting all the urine a dog
produces over either a 12-hour period and multiplying the value by two or
collecting 24 hours of urine. This typically involves some kind of urine collection
bag and a urinary catheter sewn in place (or a very cooperative dog). It is
difficult to keep a urinary collection system in place in a normal dog, and thus,
this test is problematic to run. The urine is collected and sent to the lab, and the
total production of uric acid is determined. This will tell if the dog is on track to
avoid future stones or not. Because the collection is so difficult, many skip it
and simply do the above monitoring. The goal value is less than 300 mg per
kilogram of body weight of uric acid produced daily.
The uric acid (or urate) to creatinine ratio test. The idea here was to use a
single urine sample to get an idea of how much uric acid the dog was
producing. This ratio seemed like a good idea at the time and was certainly
easier than the 24-hour urine collection but it has not panned out as a valid test
to predict stone re-formation but will tell the veterinarian if the pet owner is
cheating on the diet.
The blood urea nitrogen level (BUN) is a common parameter used to assess
kidney function. In most cases, the concern is about its being elevated, but in
monitoring stone-forming Dalmatians, a lower-than-normal BUN (ideally, less
than 10mg/dl) indicates that no dietary cheating is occurring.
Your veterinarian is likely to pick and choose from these tests to put together a protocol
they are comfortable with that fits your budget.
Off Limits for Stone-Forming Dalmatians
Brewer's yeast supplements have been popular (though ineffective) for flea
control and generally represent a tasty B vitamin supplement for dogs. This
supplement is high in purines and not appropriate for stone-forming
Dalmatians.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 6/7
Vitamin C is a common supplement for dogs, especially in joint health
nutritional products. Vitamin C is likely to overly acidify the urine of a stoneforming Dalmatian and should not be used.
Certain cancer chemotherapy protocols involve interactions with allopurinol and
must be modified.
No one has formally studied the effect of joint nutriceuticals on urine pH. If you want to use
glucosamine or other products on an arthritic stone-forming Dalmatian, the urine pH will
require monitoring to be sure excess urine acidification has not occurred.
Related resources
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Cats - September 28, 2024
Bladder Stones (Struvite) in Dogs - October 5, 2023
Lithotripsy in Dogs and Cats - June 19, 2023
Bladder Stones (Oxalate) in Dogs - June 1, 2022
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952069&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288397
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Uric Acid Stones and Urate Urolithiasis in Dogs - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952069&ind=514&objTypeID=1007 7/7

Illustration courtesy of Wendy Brooks, DVM
Urinary Incontinence in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: October 21, 2023
Published: September 06, 2004
When a house pet develops urinary
incontinence, many owners fear the worst.
Assumptions that incontinence signifies
senility or irreparable age-related change
may lead to delay in medical consultation,
relegation of the pet to an outdoor life, or
even euthanasia. In reality, urinary
incontinence should be addressed by
seeking medical advice from your
veterinarian as soon as possible.
Causes of Incontinence
It is important to differentiate incontinence (involuntary urine leakage) from behavioral
urinary issues (submissive urination), simple lack of housetraining, territorial marking of
anxious cats or unneutered males, or the senile loss of house training from canine
cognitive dysfunction. Animals may urinate in the house voluntarily, and this is different
from incontinence. Watch your pet closely to be sure what you are seeing is really
incontinence, and if it is, the good news is that most cases are easily resolved with simple,
inexpensive medications.
There are several important causes of incontinence, and most of these are ruled in or out
with a urinalysis and urine culture. The urinalysis reveals cell types and biochemical
elements in the patient’s urine, while the culture isolates the bacteria growing in the urine.
The bacterial species grown are identified and tested for their sensitivity towards different
antibiotics, the end result being confirmation of the presence of infection and a list of
appropriate antibiotics.
Most cases of incontinence are due to:
Infection of the urinary tract (usually bladder infection)
Excessive consumption of water
Weak bladder sphincter (especially common in female dogs)
Spinal cord disease.
Other conditions that may need to be explored could include bladder stones and even
tumors in the urinary tract.
Bladder Infection
This is a common cause of urinary incontinence in female dogs of all ages and in geriatric
cats. This condition is usually easily diagnosed by urine culture, though signs of infection,
such as white blood cells or bacteria, are actually visible in the urinalysis. A urine culture
will confirm the infection, identify the organism, and list several antibiotics that will be
effective. An antibiotic is selected based on expense, potential for side effects, and

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Urinary Incontinence in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952092&ind=515&objTypeID=1007 1/4
Illustration Courtesy of Wendy Brooks, DVM
convenience of usage. After a short course (generally somewhere between 1 and 3
weeks) of medication, ideally, a second urine culture or urinalysis is done to confirm that
the infection has truly been cleared up.
If a bladder infection is the cause of incontinence, most patients show improvement in
their incontinence and comfort after only a few doses of antibiotics (but it is still important
to finish the entire course so as to avoid recurrence).
Excessive Water Consumption
Some animals drink so much water that their
bladders simply overflow too easily. While
some owners have noticed that their pets
seem to be drinking more than usual, our
experience is that most owners are surprised
when the urinalysis shows excessive water
consumption. Dilute urine is obvious on the
urinalysis through a measurement called
specific gravity that compares the amount of
dissolved biochemicals in the urine to that of
pure water (which has no dissolved biochemicals). A urine specific gravity nearly the same
as water, confirms excessive water consumption; blood tests may be indicated to go with
the urine tests to determine the cause.
Causes of excessive water consumption include:
Diabetes mellitus
Cushing's syndrome
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Bladder infection (see above)
Diabetes insipidus
Kidney insufficiency
There are other causes as well but 90% are ruled in or out by a blood panel and urine
culture.
Weak Bladder Sphincter
Aging, obesity, reduced sensitivity of neurologic receptors in the sphincter and possibly
other factors all contribute to this condition which is especially common (up to one in five
affected) in female dogs. Once other more serious conditions have been ruled out, the
weak sphincter may be treated symptomatically with one of several medications.
Estrogens
It is not entirely clear how estrogens are helpful in this treatment. Originally, estrogens
were given to post-menopausal women with urinary incontinence and the treatment was
simply extrapolated to dogs. It is possible that estrogens are important in the maintenance
of neuroreceptors in the bladder sphincter and without estrogens the receptors become
unresponsive to the transmission of the storage message from higher neurologic centers.
(In other words, the message from the brain to hold the urine does not get through to the
bladder.) In dogs, diethylstilbestrol (DES) has traditionally been the most common estrogen
used, though it is now only available through compounding pharmacies. Other estrogens
that have been used include estriol (Incurin®) and conjugated estrogens such as
Premarin®. Regardless of which product is used, the basic process is the same. A higher
dose is utilized to begin therapy and, if it is effective, the dose is tapered to the lowest
dose needed to maintain effect. For DES, dosing every couple of days is typical while with
estriol most dogs end up dosed once daily.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Urinary Incontinence in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952092&ind=515&objTypeID=1007 2/4
In male dogs, testosterones seem to be more effective than estrogens, possibly through
action on the prostate which sits at the neck of the bladder and incorporates the sphincter.
Alpha-Adrenergic Agonists
These medications act by enhancing release of the neurotransmitter chemicals that act on
the receptors of bladder sphincter. Effectively, they turn up the volume dial on the “hold it”
message from the high neurologic areas. The usual medication for canine use is
phenylpropanolamine in chewable tablets, which is typically given two or three times daily.
Ephedrine and pseudoephedrine, common decongestants, are sometimes recommended
alternatively. Side effects can include irritability, appetite suppression
(phenylpropanolamine was the active ingredient in many human diet pills until recently),
and blood pressure changes. Most dogs, male and female alike, tolerate
phenylpropanolamine uneventfully. For especially resistant cases of incontinence,
estrogens and alpha-adrenergic agonists can be used together.
Anticholinergics
Anticholinergic drugs are medications that work, not on the sphincter of the bladder, but
on the rest of the bladder where urine is stored, relaxing the muscle fibers thus facilitating
storage. An example is imipramine, an anti-anxiety medication commonly used in humans.
It has anticholinergic properties and can be used in combination with
phenylpropanolamine in the treatment of animal incontinence. While phenylpropanolamine
and DES are commonly used medications for this condition, imipramine is not but it does
represent another option when a patient does not respond to the first two medications
combined. Other anticholinergic drugs that might be used include oxybutynin or flavoxate.
Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone (GnRH)
Several studies have been performed using analogs of this hormone (such as leuprolide)
in incontinent dogs for which DES and phenylpropanolamine have failed. More than half
of the dogs tested regained complete continence while still more achieved improvement.
Surgical Therapy
Medication works for most patients with weak sphincters but when medication fails there
are some surgical options to consider: colposuspension and cystourethropexy.
Colposuspension, for females only, is the most commonly performed procedure. Here, the
vagina is tacked to the bottom of the belly wall entrapping and compressing the urethra. In
one study of dogs that had failed on medication, there was complete resolution of
incontinence in 53% with colposuspension. An additional 37% became less incontinent
and 25% of those without full resolution gained complete continence when therapy with
phenylpropanolamine was added. Another recent study reported that complete continence
lasted for 1 year in only 14% of affected dogs, although many dogs improved.
Cystourethropexy is the modification of the above procedure that can be performed in
either males or females. Since there is no vagina to use in the male, the ductus deferens
are tacked down to compress the urethra. Fibers from the urethral muscles can also be
tacked down (in either male or female patients). Complications include an increased
frequency in the need to urinate (occurring in 2/3 of the patients in one study) and
straining to urinate (in about 1/3 of patients).
Urethral lengthening works for patients for whom incontinence is caused by a short
urethra. A short urethra causes a full bladder to be displaced into the pelvis and makes the
urethra too short for either of the other two surgical procedures. This is a newer surgical
procedure that so far has had good reports in the small number of dogs in which it has
been studied. Further studies should be forthcoming.
Medications listed above are used in conjunction with surgery. Surgery alone improves
approximately 50% of patients but often incontinence returns unless oral medication is
restarted.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Urinary Incontinence in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952092&ind=515&objTypeID=1007 3/4
Collagen Injections: The Newest Therapy
In this procedure an endoscope is inserted in the urethra and several injections of
collagen (the same kind used for cosmetic injections in humans) are deposited. In a study
of 40 dogs who had failed to become continent on medication alone, 27 became continent
for an average of 17 months. Furthermore, 10 dogs that experienced only partial
improvement after the procedure became completely continent when oral medication was
added, even though medication alone had been ineffective.
The procedure can alternatively be performed with medical grade collagen, with Teflon®
(which does not last as well but is apparently considerably less costly) or with a
reconstructive product called ACell®. Unfortunately, at this time there are few facilities that
perform this procedure as special equipment (cystoscopy) is required.
Unusual Causes of Incontinence
The list of causes of incontinence presented above is by no means exhaustive. While
uncommon, other causes should not be entirely counted out. Some possible causes
include:
Ectopic ureter (instead of connecting to the urinary bladder, the ureter
transporting urine from the kidney connects to the vagina or rectum so that
there is no storage of urine. This condition is typically noted in a puppy that
simply cannot be housebroken and leaks urine. The condition can be solved
surgically.)
Spinal damage, especially in the lower lumbar area. Spinal surgery may be
indicated to decompress an area of nerve pressure that is interfering with the
nerves of urination control.
Your veterinarian is in the best position to determine if it is worthwhile to pursue a rare
disease or not. Do not hesitate to ask your veterinarian questions regarding your pet’s
incontinence and the treatments or procedures described above.
When All Else Fails: Diapers and Pads
Diapers are available from a number of companies and are available in both male and
female styles.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952092&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288441
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:50 AM Urinary Incontinence in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952092&ind=515&objTypeID=1007 4/4

Graphic Courtesy of MarVistaVet
Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats
Wendy Brooks, DVM, DABVP
Revised: September 27, 2023
Published: December 26, 2006
The urinary tract infection is one of the most
common ailments in small animal practice, yet
many pet owners are confused about the medical
approach. Some common questions we hear are:
Are bladder infections contagious?
Why do I have to use the entire course of
antibiotics if my pet is obviously better
after a couple of doses?
What is the difference between doing a
urinalysis and a urine culture? Why
should both be done?
What is the difference between UTI and
idiopathic cystitis?
The urinary tract consists of the kidneys, ureters
(tubes that carry urine to the bladder for storage),
the urinary bladder, the male dog's prostate
(which encircles the bladder neck), and the
urethra that conducts urine outside the body. A
urinary tract infection could involve any of these
areas, though most commonly when we speak of
a urinary tract infection, or UTI, we mean “bladder
infection.” Because bladder infections are localized to the bladder, there are rarely signs
of infection in other body systems: no fever, no appetite loss, and no change in the blood
tests. (If the infection does ascend all the way to the kidneys, then we may well find other
signs and other lab work changes. While a kidney infection is technically also a urinary
tract infection, we usually use the term pyelonephritis to describe a kidney infection.)
It is also important to note that the term UTI is frequently erroneously used to refer to
feline idiopathic cystitis, which is a common inflammatory condition of the feline bladder
affecting young adult cats. It is not a bladder infection.
Bladder Infection: What Does it look like and Where Did it Come from?
The kidneys make urine every moment of the day. The urine is moved down the ureters
and into the bladder. The urinary bladder is a muscular little bag that stores the urine until
we are ready to get rid of it. The bladder must be able to expand for filling, contract down
for emptying, and respond to voluntary control.
The bladder is a sterile area of the body, which means that bacteria do not normally reside
there. When bacteria (or any other organisms, for that matter) gain entry and establish
growth in the bladder, infection occurs and symptoms can result. The key is establishing
growth as sometimes bacteria are just passing through, causing no harm, and disappear

8/4/25, 11:51 AM Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952574&ind=516&objTypeID=1007 1/5
Graphic Courtesy of MarVistaVet
quietly. It can be tricky to see bacteria in a urine sample and determine if they are trouble
or not. An important measure of whether there is a genuine infection or not is whether the
pet has symptoms. People with bladder infections typically report a burning sensation
while urinating. With pets, we see some of the following signs:
Excessive water consumption (though there is some controversy about this).
Urinating only small amounts at a time.
Urinating frequently and in multiple spots.
Inability to hold urine for the normal amount of time/apparent incontinence.
Bloody urine (though an infection must either involve a special organism, a
bladder stone, a bladder tumor or be particularly severe to make urine red to
the naked eye).
Lack of obvious symptoms does not mean that no treatment is needed. Some animals are
simply not observed closely enough for their caretakers to recognize symptoms. Some
patients are elderly, immune suppressed from medications or other medical conditions, or
have complicating factors, such as a history of bladder stones. For these patients, it may
be best to take a proactive approach and not wait for obvious symptoms.
The external genital area where urine is expelled is teeming with bacteria. Bladder
infection results when bacteria from the lower tract climb into the bladder, defeating the
natural defense mechanisms of the system (forward urine flow, the bladder lining,
inhospitable urine chemicals etc.). A bladder infection is not contagious.
Bladder infection is somewhat unusual in cats under the age 10 years.
Bladder infection is somewhat unusual in neutered male dogs.
Testing for Bladder Infections
There are many tests that can be performed on a urine sample and people can get
confused about what information different tests provide.
Urinalysis
The urinalysis is an important part of any database of laboratory tests. It is an important
screening tool whether or not an infection is suspected. The urinalysis examines the
chemical properties of the urine sample, such as the pH, specific gravity (a measure of
concentration), and amount of protein or other biochemicals. It also includes a visual
inspection of the urine sediment to look for crystals, cells, or bacteria. This test often
precedes the culture or lets the doctor know that a culture is in order. Indications that a
culture of a urine sample should be done based on urinalysis findings include:
Excessive white blood cells (white
blood cells fight infection and should
not be in a normal urine sample except
as an occasional finding).
Bacteria seen when the sediment is
checked under the microscope. (You
would think that bacteria alone would
confirm infection, but as mentioned,
bacteria sometimes pass through urine without stopping and establishing an
infection. Other criteria, such as symptoms of inflammation and white blood
cells, must be considered.)
Excessive protein in the urine (protein is generally conserved by the urinary
tract. Urine protein indicates either inflammation in the bladder or protein-

8/4/25, 11:51 AM Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952574&ind=516&objTypeID=1007 2/5
Graphic Courtesy of MarVistaVet
wasting by the kidneys. Infection must be ruled out before pursuing renal
protein loss).
Dilute urine. When the patient drinks water excessively, urine becomes dilute,
and it becomes impossible to detect bacteria or white blood cells so a culture
must be performed to determine if there are any organisms. Further, excessive
water consumption is a common symptom of bladder infection and should be
pursued.
If the patient has symptoms suggestive of an infection, a urinalysis need not
precede the culture; both tests can be started at the same time.
Urine Culture (and Sensitivity)
This is the only test that can confirm a urinary tract infection. In this test, a tiny sample of
urine is transferred to a specialized container and incubated for bacterial growth. This is
like planting seeds in the soil and seeing what kind of plants grow, if any.
The growth of bacteria on the culture plate confirms there is bacteria in the urine.
In addition, once colonies of bacteria are growing, the type of bacteria can be identified,
the number of colonies can be counted, and the bacteria can be tested for antibiotic
sensitivity. Knowing the concentration of bacteria in the sample helps determine if the
bacteria cultured might represent contaminants from the lower urinary tract or transient
bacteria that are not truly colonizing the bladder. Similarly, knowing the species of bacteria
also helps determine if the bacteria grown are known to cause disease or are likely to be
innocent bystanders. The antibiotic profile tells us what antibiotics will work against the
infection. There is, after all, no point in prescribing the wrong antibiotic. Clearly, the culture
is a valuable test when infection is suspected.
Urine culture results require at least a couple of days as bacteria require this long to grow.
Sample Collection
There are four ways to collect a urine
sample: table top, free catch, catheter,
and cystocentesis. A table top sample is
collected from the exam table or other
surface where the patient has deposited
urine. This sample is likely contaminated
with bacteria from the environment and/or
bacteria from the lower urinary tract. This
is the least desirable urine collection
method but sometimes it's the only option.
If bacteria are grown, their numbers and
species provide a strong clue as to
whether or not they represent infection or
contamination.
A free catch sample is obtained by
catching urine mid-air as it is passed. The
sample may be contaminated by the
bacteria of the lower urinary tract but will
not be contaminated by the floor or other environmental surface.
With the catheter method, a small tube is passed into the bladder and the sample is
withdrawn. This is not the most comfortable method for the patient though the procedure
is fairly quick. Potentially, bacteria can be introduced into the bladder accidentally with the
catheter so this represents a drawback though fortunately, this is a rare occurrence

8/4/25, 11:51 AM Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952574&ind=516&objTypeID=1007 3/5
(assuming the catheter is only for urine sample collection and not placed for longer term
urine collection). The sample obtained is unlikely to be contaminated and should
represent urine as it exits the bladder.
The ideal collection method is cystocentesis: a needle taps directly into the bladder. In this
way, an uncontaminated sample is collected directly from the bladder. Sometimes, a little
blood enters the sample during the needle stick, but for culture purposes, the sample can
be considered pristine.
Treatment for Simple (Sporadic) Infection
The International Society for Companion Animal Infectious Disease (ISCAID) determines
guidelines for classifying UTIs and how to treat them. The simplest type of UTI is called
the sporadic infection, which means the patient has had less than three UTIs in the
preceding 12 months. The UTI is diagnosed based on the urinalysis and patient history,
the sample is cultured to get a list of effective antibiotics, and the patient is treated.
Symptoms should be obviously improved within 48 hours of starting the correct antibiotic.
How long treatment should continue is controversial. The traditional duration is 10-14 days
of antibiotics. In an effort to reduce antibiotic resistance among the world's bacteria, the
effectiveness of shorter durations has been explored. ISCAID currently recommends
shorter courses, such as three to five days. Your veterinarian may select either of these
strategies.
Post-treatment urinalysis or culture may be recommended to confirm that the infection is
resolved, but the most important aspect determining the conclusion of treatment is
whether or not the patient still has symptoms.
Treatment of Recurrent Infection
Recurrent infection is defined as more than three UTIs in the preceding 12 months or two
or more UTIs in the preceding 6 months. This definition is a somewhat more complicated
situation. Culture results are especially important as they will help determine if a UTI
simply did not resolve with prior treatment or if a whole new infection has started. Imaging
of the urinary tract to look for complicating factors such as bladder stones, polyps, kidney
involvement or some other situation is preventing cure. Further, post-treatment cultures
become more important.
Here are some factors to explore when infections continue to emerge:
Kidney Infection (Pyelonephritis)
If the patient's immune system is not ideal, the infection in the bladder may ascend into
the kidneys, where it can cause kidney failure and a more serious infection. There is
currently no good test to determine whether or not a kidney is infected, though there might
be hints on the lab work (urinary tract infection in combination with fever, elevated white
blood cell count, pain in the area of the kidneys). Ultrasound can help and there are
specific radiographic studies that can help as well. Obviously, kidney involvement is a
more serious condition. Traditionally, antibiotics are given for a long time (four to six
weeks). ISCAID has amended this to follow current human guidelines of a 14-day course
of treatment. Your veterinarian may choose either course or something in between.
Bladder Stones
Stones in the bladder can cause infection, and infection can cause stones. We have an
area on bladder stones for more information.
Urachal Diverticulum
In embryonic life, urine is removed from the body via the umbilical cord. A structure called
the urachus exits the top of the bladder and enters the umbilical cord so that urine can be

8/4/25, 11:51 AM Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952574&ind=516&objTypeID=1007 4/5
dumped into the mother's bloodstream for removal by her kidneys. After birth, the urachus
degenerates, but sometimes a small nipple-like protrusion exists on the top of the bladder.
This section can protect a bladder infection in which case recheck cultures will reveal the
same organism over and over until the urachal diverticulum is surgically removed.
Bladder Tumors
Bladder tumors, with or without infection, often create symptoms similar to those of a
severe bladder infection. The tip off to look for a tumor is that infection and/or symptoms
do not clear up with an appropriate antibiotic course, urine is bloody, and there are no
bladder stones on radiographs. The most common bladder tumor is transitional cell
carcinoma. (Our article on this topic includes more information on how to detect this tumor;
often ultrasound is needed to image the inside of the urinary bladder.)
Prostatitis
The prostate gland is located at the neck of the bladder and due to its glandular nature,
infection in the bladder readily spreads to the prostate, where the crypts and crannies are
particularly protective against the infection. It is nearly impossible to clear the prostate of
the infection without neutering. Small abscesses within the prostate may require drainage
using ultrasound guidance. Only certain antibiotics are capable of penetrating the prostate
to reach the infection. Bacterial prostatitis can be a complicated situation.
Vaginal Stricture
Sometimes when an infection simply cannot seem to be cleared up, the reason is a
vaginal stricture. A vaginal stricture is a small narrowing in the vagina that creates a ledge
for bacteria to colonize. If a female dog's UTI seems stubborn against antibiotics that the
culture indicates should be effective, a vaginal exam may be warranted. A stricture can
generally be broken down by the veterinarian's finger, though some dogs find this painful
and sedation may be needed.
Most urinary tract infections are straightforward and require only a relatively
short antibiotic course for clearance.
URL: https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/doc/?id=4952574&pid=19239
9dcb9c8b-a3f7-4f5f-b80d-8241f55580c1.1754288480
The content of this site is owned by Veterinary Information Network (VIN®), and its reproduction and
distribution may only be done with VIN®'s express permission.
The information contained here is for general purposes only and is not a substitute for advice from your
veterinarian. Any reliance you place on such information is strictly at your own risk.
Links to non-VIN websites do not imply a recommendation or endorsement by VIN® of the views or content
contained within those sites.

8/4/25, 11:51 AM Urinary Tract (Bladder) Infection in Dogs and Cats - Veterinary Partner - VIN
https://veterinarypartner.vin.com/default.aspx?pid=19239&catId=254103&id=4952574&ind=516&objTypeID=1007 5/5

